

================================================================================BROTHERS OF PERIL

A Story of Old Newfoundland




_WORKS OF THEODORE ROBERTS_

_The Red Feathers_           _$1.50_
_Brothers of Peril_           _1.50_
_Hemming the Adventurer_      _1.50_


_L. C. PAGE & COMPANY_ _New England Building, Boston, Mass._


[Illustration: "A VIVID CIRCLE OF RED ON THE SNOW OF THAT NAMELESS
WILDERNESS"]




Brothers of Peril

A Story of Old Newfoundland

By

Theodore Roberts
_Author of_ "Hemming, the Adventurer"

_Illustrated by_ H. C. Edwards

[Illustration: Logo]

_Boston_ L. C. Page & Company _Mdccccv_


_Copyright, 1905_
BY L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
(INCORPORATED)

_All rights reserved_

Published June, 1905
Second Impression, March, 1908

_COLONIAL PRESS
Electrotyped and Printed by C. H. Simonds & Co.
Boston, Mass., U.S.A._




Preface


During the three centuries directly following John Cabot's discovery of
Newfoundland, that unfortunate island was the sport of careless kings,
selfish adventurers, and diligent pirates. While England, France, Spain,
and Portugal were busy with courts and kings, and with spectacular
battles, their fishermen and adventurers toiled together and fought
together about the misty headlands of that far island. Fish, not glory,
was their quest! Full cargoes, sweetly cured, was their desire--and let
fame go hang!

The merchants of England undertook the guardianship of the "Newfounde
Land." In greed, in valour, and in achievement they won their mastery.
Their greed was a two-edged sword which cut all 'round. It hounded the
aborigines; it bullied the men of France and Spain; it discouraged the
settlement of the land by stout hearts of whatever nationality. It was
the dream of those merchant adventurers of Devon to have the place
remain for ever nothing but a fishing-station. They faced the pirates,
the foreign fishers, the would-be settlers, and the natural hardships
with equal fortitude and insolence. When some philosopher dreamed of
founding plantations in the king's name and to the glory of God,
England, and himself, then would the greedy merchants slay or cripple
the philosopher's dream in the very palace of the king. Ay, they were
powerful enough at court, though so little remarked in the histories of
the times! But, ever and anon, some gentleman adventurer, or humble
fisherman from the ships, would escape their vigilance and strike a blow
at the inscrutable wilderness.

The fishing admirals loom large in the history of the island. They were
the hands and eyes of the wealthy merchants. The master of the first
vessel to enter any harbour at the opening of the season was, for a
greater or lesser period of time, admiral and judge of that harbour. It
was his duty to parcel out anchorage, and land on which to dry fish, to
each ship in the harbour; to see that no sailors from the fleet escaped
into the woods; to discourage any visions of settlement which sight of
the rugged forests might raise in the romantic heads of the gentlemen of
the fleet; to see that all foreigners were hustled on every occasion,
and to take the best of everything for himself. Needless to say, it was
a popular position with the hard-fisted skippers.

In the narratives of the early explorers frequent mention is made of the
peaceful nature of the aborigines. At first they displayed unmistakable
signs of friendly feeling. They were all willingness to trade with the
loud-mouthed strangers from over the eastern horizon. They helped at the
fishing, and at the hunting of seals and caribou. They bartered
priceless pelts for iron hatchets and glass trinkets. Later, however, we
read of treachery and murder on the parts of both the visitors and the
natives. The itch of slave-dealing led some of the more daring
shipmasters and adventurers to capture, and carry back to England,
Beothic braves and maidens. Many of the kidnapped savages were kindly
treated and made companions of by English noblemen and gentlefolk. It is
recorded that more than one Beothic brave sported a sword at his hip in
fashionable places of London Town before Death cut the silken bonds of
his motley captivity.

Master John Guy, an alderman of Bristol, who obtained a Royal Charter in
1610, to settle and develop Newfoundland, wrote of the Beothics as a
kindly and mild-mannered race. Of their physical characteristics he
says: "They are of middle size, broad-chested, and very erect.... Their
hair is diverse, some black, some brown, and some yellow."

As to the ultimate fate of the Beothics there are several suppositions.
An aged Micmac squaw, who lives on Hall's Bay, Notre Dame Bay, says that
her father, in his youth, knew the last of the Beothics. At that
time--something over a hundred years ago--the race numbered between one
and two hundred souls. They made periodical excursions to the salt water
to fish, and to trade with a few friendly whites and Nova Scotian
Micmacs. But, for the most part, they avoided the settlements. They had
reason enough for so doing, for many of the settlers considered a
lurking Beothic as fair a target for his buckshot as a bear or caribou.
One November day a party of Micmac hunters tried to follow the remnant
of the broken race on their return trip to the great wilderness of the
interior. The trail was lost in a fall of snow on the night of the first
day of the journey. And there, with the obliterated trail, ends the
world's knowledge of the original inhabitants of Newfoundland; save of
one woman of the race named Mary March, who died, a self-ordained
fugitive about the outskirts of civilization, some ninety years ago.

To-day there are a few bones in the museum at St. John's. One hears
stories of grassy circles beside the lakes and rivers, where wigwams
once stood. Flint knives and arrow-heads are brought to light with the
turning of the farmer's furrow. But the language of the lost tribe is
forgotten, and the history of it is unrecorded.

In the following tale I have drawn the wilderness of that far time in
the likeness of the wilderness as I knew it, and loved it, a few short
years ago. The seasons bring their oft-repeated changes to brown barren,
shaggy wood, and empurpled hill; but the centuries pass and leave no
mark. I have dared to resurrect an extinct tribe for the purposes of
fiction. I have drawn inspiration from the spirit of history rather than
the letter! But the heart of the wilderness, and the hearts of men and
women, I have pictured, in this romance of olden time, as I know them
to-day.

T. R.

_November, 1904._




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                      PAGE
     I. A BOY WINS HIS MAN-NAME                                 1

    II. THE OLD CRAFTSMAN BY THE SALT WATER                     9

   III. THE FIGHT IN THE MEADOW                                16

    IV. OUENWA SETS OUT ON A VAGUE QUEST                       24

     V. THE ADMIRAL OF THE HARBOUR                             34

    VI. THE FANGS OF THE WOLF SLAYER                           43

   VII. THE SILENT VILLAGE                                     56

  VIII. A LETTER FOR OUENWA                                    65

    IX. AN UNCHARTERED PLANTATION                              73

     X. GENTRY AT FORT BEATRIX                                 83

    XI. THE SETTING-IN OF WINTER                               94

   XII. MEDITATION AND ACTION                                 104

  XIII. SIGNS OF A DIVIDED HOUSE                              116

   XIV. A TRICK OF PLAY-ACTING                                126

    XV. THE HIDDEN MENACE                                     133

   XVI. THE CLOVEN HOOF                                       140

  XVII. THE CONFIDENCE OF YOUTH                               148

 XVIII. EVENTS AND REFLECTIONS                                156

   XIX. TWO OF A KIND                                         164

    XX. BY ADVICE OF BLACK FEATHER                            174

   XXI. THE SEEKING OF THE TRIBESMEN                          183

  XXII. BRAVE DAYS FOR YOUNG HEARTS                           190

 XXIII. BETROTHED                                             200

  XXIV. A FIRE-LIT BATTLE. OUENWA'S RETURN                    207

   XXV. FATE DEALS CARDS OF BOTH COLOURS IN THE LITTLE FORT   217

  XXVI. PIERRE D'ANTONS PARRIES ANOTHER THRUST                227

 XXVII. A GRIM TURN OF MARCH MADNESS                          233

XXVIII. THE RUNNING OF THE ICE                                241

  XXIX. WOLF SLAYER COMES AND GOES; AND TROWLEY
          RECEIVES A VISITOR                                  252

   XXX. MAGGIE STONE TAKES MUCH UPON HERSELF                  264

  XXXI. WHILE THE SPARS ARE SCRAPED                           273

 XXXII. THE FIRST STAGE OF THE HOMEWARD VOYAGE IS
          BRAVELY ACCOMPLISHED                                279

XXXIII. IN THE MERRY CITY                                     287

 XXXIV. PIERRE D'ANTONS SIGNALS HIS OLD COMRADES,
          AND AGAIN PUTS TO SEA                               294

  XXXV. THE BRIDEGROOM ATTENDS TO OTHER MATTERS THAN LOVE     306

 XXXVI. OVER THE SIDE                                         317

XXXVII. THE MOTHER                                            323




BROTHERS OF PERIL

A Story of Old Newfoundland




CHAPTER I.

A BOY WINS HIS MAN-NAME


The boy struck again with his flint knife, and again the great wolf tore
at his shoulder. The eyes of the boy were fierce as those of the beast.
Neither wavered. Neither showed any sign of pain. The dark spruces stood
above them, with the first shadows of night in their branches; and the
western sky was stained red where the sun had been. Twice the wolf
dropped his antagonist's shoulder, in a vain attempt to grip the throat.
The boy, pressed to the ground, flung himself about like a dog, and
repeatedly drove his clumsy weapon into the wolf's shaggy side.

At last the fight ended. The great timber-wolf lay stretched dead in
awful passiveness. His fangs gleamed like ivory between the scarlet jaws
and black lips. A shimmer of white menaced the quiet wilderness from the
recesses of the half-shut eyelids.

For a few minutes the boy lay still, with the fingers of his left hand
buried in the wolf's mane, and his right hand a blot of red against the
beast's side. Presently, staggering on bent legs, he went down to the
river and washed his mangled arm and shoulder in the cool water. The
shock of it cleared his brain and steadied his eyes. He waded into the
current to his middle, stooped to the racing surface, and drank
unstintingly. Strength flooded back to blood and muscle, and the slender
limbs regained their lightness.

By this time a few pale stars gleamed on the paler background of the
eastern sky. A long finger-streak of red, low down on the hilltops,
still lightened the west. A purple band hung above it like a belt of
magic wampum--the war-belt of some mighty god. Above that, Night, the
silent hunter, set up the walls of his lodge of darkness.

The boy saw nothing of the changing beauty of the sky. He might read it,
knowingly enough, for the morrow's rain or frost; but beyond that he
gave it no heed. He returned to the dead wolf, and set about the
skinning of it with his rude blade. He worked with skill and speed. Soon
head and pelt were clear of the red carcass. After collecting his arrows
and bow, he flung the prize across his shoulder and started along a
faint trail through the spruces.

The trail which the boy followed seemed to lead away from the river by
hummock and hollow; and yet it cunningly held to the course of the
stream. Now the night was fallen. A soft wind brushed over in the
tree-tops. The voices of the rapids smote across the air with a deeper
note. As the boy moved quietly along, sharp eyes flamed at him, and
sharp ears were pricked to listen. Forms silent as shadows faded away
from his path, and questioning heads were turned back over sinewy
shoulders, sniffing silently. They smelt the wolf and they smelt the
man. They knew that there had been another violent death in the valley
of the River of Three Fires.

After walking swiftly for nearly an hour, following a path which less
primitive eyes could not have found, the boy came out on a small meadow
bright with fires. Nineteen or twenty conical wigwams, made of birch
poles, bark, and caribou hides, stood about the meadow. In front of each
wigwam burned a cooking-fire, for this was a land of much wood. The
meadow was almost an island, having the river on two sides and a shallow
lagoon cutting in behind, leaving only a narrow strip of alder-grown
"bottom" by which one might cross dry-shod. The whole meadow, including
the alders and a clump of spruces, was not more than five acres in
extent.

The boy halted in front of the largest lodge, and threw the wolfskin
down before the fire. There he stood, straight and motionless, with an
air of vast achievement about him. Two women, who were broiling meat at
the fire, looked from the shaggy, blood-stained pelt to the stalwart
stripling. They cried out to him, softly, in tones of love and
admiration. Jaws and fangs and half-shut eyes appeared frightful enough
in the red firelight, even in death.

"Ah! ah!" they cried, "what warrior has done this deed?"

"Now give me my man-name," demanded the boy.

The older of the two women, his mother, tried to tend his wounded arm;
but he shook her roughly away. She seemed accustomed to the treatment.
Still clinging to him, she called him by a score of great names. A
stalwart man, the chief of the village, strode from the dark interior of
the nearest wigwam, and glanced from his son to the untidy mass of hair
and skin. His eyes gleamed at sight of his boy's torn arm and the white
teeth of the wolf.

"Wolf Slayer," he cried. He turned to the women. "Wolf Slayer," he
repeated; "let this be his man-name--Wolf Slayer."

So this boy, son of Panounia the chief, became, at the age of fourteen
years, a warrior among his father's people.

The inhabitants of that great island were all of one race. In history
they are known as Beothics. At the time of this tale they were divided
into two nations or tribes. Hate had set them apart from one another,
breaking the old bond of blood. Each tribe was divided into numerous
villages. The island was shared pretty evenly between the nations. Soft
Hand was king of the Northerners. It was of one of his camps that the
father of Wolf Slayer was chief.

Soft Hand was a great chief, and wise beyond his generation. For more
than fifty years he had held the richest hunting-grounds in the island
against the enemy. His strength had been of both head and hand. Now he
was stiff with great age. Now his hair was gray and scanty, and
unadorned by flaming feathers of hawk and sea-bird. The snows of eighty
winters had drifted against the walls of his perishable but ever defiant
lodges, and the suns of eighty summers had faded the pigments of his
totem of the great Black Bear. Though he was slow of anger, and fair in
judgment, his people feared him as they feared no other. Though he was
gentle with the weak and young, and had honoured his parents in their
old age and loved the wife of his youth, still the strongest warrior
dared not sneer.

The village of this mighty chief was situated at the head of Wind Lake.
On the night of Wolf Slayer's adventure, Soft Hand and his grandson
arrived at the lesser village on the River of Three Fires. They
travelled in bark canoes and were accompanied by a dozen braves. The
grandson of the old chief was a lad of about Wolf Slayer's age. He was
slight of figure and dark of skin. His name was Ouenwa. He was a dreamer
of strange things, and a maker of songs. He and Wolf Slayer sat together
by the fire. Wolf Slayer held his wounded arm ever under the visitor's
eyes, and talked endlessly of his deed. For a long time Ouenwa listened
attentively, smiling and polite, as was his usual way with strangers.
But at last he grew weary of his companion's talk. He wanted to listen,
in peace, to the song of the river. How could he understand what the
rapids were saying with all this babbling of "knife" and "wolf" in his
ears?

"All this wind," he said, "would kill a pack of wolves, or even the
black cave-devil himself."

"There is no wind to-night," replied Wolf Slayer, glancing up at the
trees.

"There is a mighty wind blowing about this fire," said Ouenwa, "and it
whistles altogether of a great warrior who slew a wolf."

"At least that is not work for a dreamer," retorted the other, sullenly.
Ouenwa's answer was a smile as soft and fleeting as the light-shadows of
the fire.

At an early hour of the next morning the great chief's party started
up-stream in their canoes, on the return journey to Wind Lake. For hours
Soft Hand brooded in silence, deaf to his grandson's hundred questions.
He had grown somewhat moody in the last year. He gazed away to the
forest-clad, mist-wreathed capes ahead, and heeded not the high piping
of his dead son's child. His mind was busy with thoughts of the events
of the past night. He recalled the tones of Panounia's voice with a
shake of the head. He recalled the sullen smouldering of that stalwart
chief's eyes. He sighed, and glanced at the lad in the forging craft
beside him.

"I grow old," he murmured. "The voice of my power is breaking to its
last echo. My command over my people slips like a frozen thong of raw
leather. And Panounia! What lurks in the dull brain of him?"

The sun rose above the forest spires, clear and warm. The mists drew
skyward and melted in the gold-tinted azure. Twillegs flew, piping,
across the brown current of the river. Sandpipers, on down-bent wings,
skimmed the pebbly shore. A kingfisher flashed his burnished feathers
and screamed his strident challenge, ever an arrow-flight ahead of the
voyagers. He warned the furtive folk of the great chief's approach.

"Kingfisher would be a fitting name for the boy who killed the wolf,"
said Ouenwa.

The old man glanced at him sharply. His thin face was sombre with more
than the shadow of years.

"Nay," he replied. "His is no empty cry. Beware of him, my son!"




CHAPTER II.

THE OLD CRAFTSMAN BY THE SALT WATER


Montaw, the arrow-maker, dwelt alone at the head of a small bay. His
home was half-wigwam, half-hut. The roof was of poles, partly covered
with the hides of caribou and partly with a square of sail-cloth, which
had been given him by a Basque fisherman in exchange for six beaver
skins. The walls of the unusual lodge were of turf and stone. Here and
there were signs of intercourse with the strangers out of the Eastern
sea,--an iron fishhook, a scrap of gold lace, and a highly polished
copper pot. Of these treasures the recluse was justly proud, for had he
not acquired them at risk of sudden extinction by the breath of the
clapping fire-stick?

The arrow-maker was an old man. In his youth he had been a hunter of
renown and a great traveller, and had sojourned long in the lodges of
the Southern nation. He had loved a woman of that people,--and she had
given him laughter in return for his devotion. Journeying back to his
own hunting-grounds, he had planned a huge revenge. At once all his
skill and bravery had been turned to less open ways than those of the
lover and warrior. In little more than a year's time he had driven the
tribes to a lasting and bitter war. Even now as he sat before the door
of his lodge, he was shaping spear-heads and arrow-heads for the
fighting men of Soft Hand's nation. Some arrows he made of jasper, and
some of flint, and some of purple slate. Those of slate would break off
in the wound. They were the grim old craftsman's pets.

One day a young man from the valley of the River of Three Fires brought
Montaw a string of fine trout, in payment for a spear-head. For awhile
they talked together in the sunlight at the door of the lodge.

"For the chase," said the old man, "I make the long shape of flint,
three fingers wide, and to this I bind a long and heavy shaft. Such an
arrow will hold in the side of the running deer, and may be plucked out
after death."

"I have even seen it, father," replied the young man, in supercilious
tones; for he considered himself a mighty hunter.

"For the battle," continued the arrow-maker, "I chip the flint and
shape the narrow splinters of slate. All three are good in their way if
the bow be strong--and the arm."

The old craftsman made a song. It was rough as his arrow-heads.


     "Arrows of gray and arrows of black
       Soon shall be red.
     What will the white moon say to the proud
       Warriors, dead?

     "Arrows of jasper, arrows of flint,
       Arrows of slate.
     So, with the skill of my hands, I shape
       Arrows of hate.

     "Fly, my little ones, straight and true,
       Silent as sleep.
     Tell me, wind, of the flints I sow,
       What shall I reap?

     "Sorrow will come to their council-fires.
       Weeping and fear
     Will stalk to the heart of their great chief's lodge,
       Year after year.

     "When the moon rides on the purple hills,
       Joyous of face,
     Then do I give, to the men of my tribe,
       Heads for the chase.

     "When the chief's fire on the hilltop glows
       Like a red star,
     Then do I give, to the men of my tribe,
       Heads for the war.

     "Arrows of jasper, arrows of flint,
       Arrows of slate.
     Thus, in the door of my lodge, I nurse
       Battle and hate!"


One evening, as he sat before his lodge looking seaward, his trained
ears caught the sound of a faint call from the wooded hills behind. He
did not turn his head or change his position. But he held his breath,
the better to listen. Again came the cry, very weak and far away.

"It is the voice of a woman," he said, and smiled grimly.

Cheerless and desolately gray, the light of the east faded into the
desolate gray of the sea. Black, like stalking shadows, stood the little
islands of the headlands. The last of the light died out like the heart
of fire in the shroud of cooling ashes. Again came the cry, whispering
across the stillness.

"It may be the voice of a child, lost in the woods," said the
arrow-maker. He rose from his seat and entered the lodge. He blew the
coals of his fire back to a tiny flame. He drew up to it the burnt ends
of faggots. Then he took in his hand another of his Eastern prizes--a
broad-bladed knife--and started across the tumbled rocks toward the edge
of the wood. Though old, he was still strong and tough of limb and
courageous of heart. Sure and swift he made his way through the heavy
growth of spruce. Once he paused for the space of a heart-beat, to make
sure of his direction. Again and again was the piteous cry repeated.

The old man kept up his tireless trot through underbrush and swamp, and
displayed neither fatigue nor caution until he reached the bank of a
narrow and turbulent stream. Here he drew into the shadow of a clump of
firs. He lay close, and breathed heavily. By this time the moon had
cleared the knolls. Its thin radiance flooded the wilderness. In the air
was a whisper of gathering frost. The water of the little river twisted
black and silver, and worried at the fanged rocks that tore it, with a
voice of agony.

The crying had ceased; but the eyes of the old craftsman questioned the
farther shore with a gaze steady and keen. There seemed to be something
wrong with the shadows. A bent figure slipped down to the edge of the
stream where the water spun in an eddy. It dropped on hands and knees
and crawled to the black and unstable lip of the tide. Again the cry
rang abroad, thin and high above the complaining tumult of the current.
The watcher left his hiding-place and waded the stream. At the edge of
the spinning eddy he found a woman. She lay exhausted. A long shaft hung
to her left shoulder. Blood trickled down her bare and rounded arm. The
arrow-maker lifted her against his shoulder and bathed her face in the
cool water until her eyelids lifted.

"Chief," she whispered, "pluck out the arrow."

He shook his head. His trade was with battle and death, but it was half
a lifetime since he had felt the gushing of human blood on his hands.

"Father," she cried, faintly, "I pray you, pluck it out. The pain of it
eats into my spirit. It sprang to me from a little wood, bitter and
noiseless--and I heard not so much as the twang of the string."

The old man held her with his left arm. With strong and gentle fingers
he worked the arrow in the wound. She quivered with the pain of it.
Blood came more freely. He trembled at the hot touch of it across his
fingers. He had dwelt so long in the quiet of his craft. Then the barbed
blade came away from the wound, and he clutched it in his reeking palm.
The woman sobbed with mingled pain and relief. The old man stepped into
the moonlight and lifted the arrow to his eyes.

"It is none of my making," he said.

He heard the woman sobbing in the dark. Returning to her he bound her
shoulder with his belt of dressed leather. Then, lifting her tenderly,
he again forded the flashing current of the complaining river.




CHAPTER III.

THE FIGHT IN THE MEADOW


Even while the arrow-maker carried the wounded woman, arrows of the same
shape as that which had stabbed her tender flesh were threatening the
little village on the River of Three Fires. For days several war-parties
from the South had been stealing through the country, raiding the lesser
villages, and bent on destroying the nation of Soft Hand, and possessing
his hunting-grounds. It was a laggard of one of the smaller bands that
had wounded the woman. She had been far from her lodge at the time,
seeking some healing herbs in the forest, and he had fired on her out of
fear that she had discovered him and would warn her people. In her pain
and fright, she had wandered coastward for several miles.

Silent as shadows, the invading warriors drew down toward the little
meadow. Clouds were over the face of the white October moon. A cold mist
floated in the valley. The leaders of the invaders, lying low among the
alders at the edge of the clearing, could see the unguarded people
moving about their red fires. There was a scent of cooking deer-meat in
the chill air. The chief of the attacking party lay on the damp grass
and peered between the stems of the alders. He smiled exultantly. A
quick slaughter, and then to a feast already prepared. He and his braves
had enjoyed but poor fare during their long march.

So shall I leave him, sniffing the breath of the cooking fires, and turn
to Wolf Slayer. Late of that afternoon Wolf Slayer had sallied forth in
quest of something to kill. The woods had seemed deserted, and in less
than an hour after his valorous exit from the camp, he had fallen asleep
on a warm and sheltered strip of shingle. The river flashed in front,
and on three sides brooded the crowding trees. When he awoke, the sun
had set, and the river, a curved mirror for the western sky, was red as
fire--or blood. Down-stream, about two hundred yards distant, a sombre
bluff thrust its rocky breast into the water. The boy gazed at this, and
his eyes widened with dismay. Then they narrowed with hate. Out of the
shelter of the rocks and the shadows, and into the flaming waters, came
figure after figure. They waded knee-deep, hip-deep, shoulder-deep, into
that molten glory. Then they swam; and the ripples washed back from
gleaming neck and shoulder like lighter flames. One by one they stole
from the shadow, swam the radiance, and again sought the shadow.

The boy trembled. The devils of fear and rage had their fingers on him.
Spellbound, he watched close upon a hundred warriors make the passage of
the river. Then he, too, sank noiselessly into the shelter of the trees.
He was old enough to know what this meant, and his heart hurt him with
its pent-up fury as he crawled through the underbrush. He was dismayed
at the sound of his own breathing. He heard the distant rapping of a
woodpecker, the fall of a spent leaf from an alder, and the soft breath
of a dying wind; and the familiar sounds filled him with awe. And yet,
but for these sounds, the whole world might be dead and the forest
empty. Thought of the hundred fighting men moving steadily upon the
unguarded homes of his people, with no more warning than the sound of a
swamp-bird's flight, was like a nightmare. But presently the courage
that had helped him slay the wolf came to him, and he thought of the
glory to be won by saving the threatened village. He did not strengthen
his heart to the task for sake of his mother's life and the lives of his
playmates; but because the warriors would call him a hero. Keeping just
within the edge of the woods, he moved up-stream as speedily as he might
without making any sound. He came upon a brown hare crouched beside a
clump of ferns. He might have touched it with his hand, so unaware was
it of his presence. He passed beneath an alder branch whereon perched a
big slate-gray jay. It was not a foot from his back as he crawled under,
and it did not take flight. But it eyed him intently, to make sure that
he was not a fox. Sometimes he lay still for a little, listening. He
heard nothing, though he started at a hundred fancied sounds. Twilight
deepened into dusk, and dusk into gloom. The moon sailed up over the
hills, and long banners of cloud passed across the face of it.

Presently Wolf Slayer came within sight of the fires of the village. The
red light flashed on the angry river beyond, but left the lagoon in
darkness. He crawled into the water inch by inch, scarcely breaking the
calm, black surface. Then he swam, without noise of splashing, and
landed at the foot of the meadow like a great beaver. He crawled into
the red circle of one of the fires, and told his news to the braves
gathered around. Men slipped from fire to fire. Without any unwonted
disturbance, the whole village armed itself. Suddenly, with a fierce
shout and a flight of arrows, the alders were attacked. The invaders
were checked at the very moment of their fancied victory.

The fighting scattered. Here three men struggled together in the
shallows at the head of the lagoon. Farther out, one tossed his arms and
sank into the black depths. In the open a half-score warriors bent their
bows. Among the twisted stems of the alders they pulled and strangled,
like beasts of prey. Back in the spruces they slew with clubs and
knives, feeling for one another in the dark. Their war-cries and shouts
of hate rang fearfully on the night air, and awoke unholy echoes along
the valley.

In the front of the battle Wolf Slayer fought like a man. His lack of
stature saved him from death more than once in that fearful encounter.
Many a vicious blow glanced harmless, or missed him altogether, as he
stumbled and bent among the alders. At first he fought with a long,
flint knife,--the work of the old arrow-maker. But this was splintered
in his hand by the murderous stroke of a war-club. He wrenched a spear
from the clutch of a dying brave. A leaping figure went down before his
unexpected lunge. It rolled over; then, queerly sprawling, it lay still.
An arrow from the open ripped along an alder stem, rattled its shaft
among the dry twigs, and struck a glancing blow on the young brave's
neck. He stumbled, grabbing at the shadows. He fell--and forgot the
fight.

In light and darkness the battle raged on. Wigwams were overthrown, and
about the little fires warriors gave up their violent lives. At last the
encampment was cleared, and saved from destruction; and those of the
invaders who remained beside the trampled fires had ceased to menace.
Along the black edges of the forest ran the cries and tumult of the
struggle. Spent arrows floated on the lagoon. Red knives lifted and
turned in the underbrush.

Wolf Slayer, dizzy and faint, crawled back to the lodges of his people.
Other warriors were returning. They came exultant, with the lust of
fighting still aflame in their eyes. Some strode arrogantly. Some
crawled, as Wolf Slayer had. Some staggered to the home fires and reeled
against the lodges, and some got no farther than the outer circle of
light. And many came not at all.

The chief, with a great gash high on his breast (he had bared arms and
breast for the battle), sought about the clearing and trampled fringe of
alders, and at last, returning to the disordered camp, found Wolf
Slayer. With a glad, high shout of triumph, he lifted the boy in his
arms and carried him home. The mother met them at the door of the lodge.
In fearful silence the man and woman washed and bound the young brave's
wound, and watched above his faint breathing with anxious hearts.

"Little one, strengthen your feet against the turn of the dark trail,"
whispered the mother. "See, our fires are bright to guide you back to
your own people."

"Little chief, though this battle is ended, there are many good fights
yet to come," whispered the father. "The fighters of the camp will have
great need of you when we turn from our sleep. The old bear grumbles at
the mouth of his den!--will you not be with us when we singe his fur?"

"Hush, hush!" cried the woman.

The boy, opening his eyes, turned the feet of his spirit from the dark
trail.

"I saw the lights of the lost fires," he murmured, "and the hunting-song
of dead braves was in my ears."

Wolf Slayer was nursed back to health and strength. Not once--not even
at the edge of Death's domain--had his arrogance left him. It seemed
that the days of suffering had but hardened his already hard heart. Lad
though he was, the villagers began to feel the weight of his hand upon
them. He bullied and beat the other boys of the camp.




CHAPTER IV.

OUENWA SETS OUT ON A VAGUE QUEST


In the dead of winter--in that season of sweeping winds and aching
skies, when the wide barrens lie uncheered of life from horizon to
horizon--Soft Hand sent many of his warriors to the South. They followed
in the "leads" of the great herds of caribou, going partly for the meat
of the deer and partly to strike terror into the hearts of the Southern
enemy. At the head of this party went Panounia, chief of the village on
the River of Three Fires, and with him he took his hardy son, Wolf
Slayer. Grim plans were bred on that journey. Grim tales were told
around the big fire at night. The evil thing which Panounia hatched,
with his bragging tongue, grew day by day and night by night. The hearts
of the warriors were fired with the shameful flame. They dreamed things
that had never happened, and wrought black visions out of the
foolishnesses of their brains.

"The bear nods," they repeated, one to another, after the chief had
talked to them. "The bear nods, like an old woman over a pot of stew.
But for Panounia, surely the men of the South would have scattered our
lodges and led us, captive, to the playgrounds of their children and
their squaws. Such a fate would warm the heart of Soft Hand, for is not
our Great Chief an old woman himself?"

So, far from the eye and paw of the great bear, the foxes barked at his
power. The moon heard it, and the silent trees, and the wind which
carries no messages.

About this time Ouenwa, the grandson of Soft Hand, decided to make a
journey of many days from the lodges at the head of Wind Lake to the
Salt Water. He felt no interest in the Southern invasion. His eyes
longed for a sight of the edges of the land and the breast of the great
waters beyond. He had heard, in his inland home, rumour of mighty wooden
canoes walled higher than the peak of a wigwam, and manned by
loud-mouthed warriors from beyond the fogs and the rising sun. Some
wiseacre, squatted beside the old chief's fire, hinted that the
strangers were gods. He told many wonderful stories to back his
argument. Soft Hand nodded. But Ouenwa smiled and shook his head.

"Would gods make such flights for the sake of a few dried fishes and a
few dressed pelts of beaver and fox?" he asked.

"The gods of trade would do so," replied the wiseacre. "Also," he added,
"they slay at great distances by means of brown stakes which are
flame-tongued and smoke-crowned and thunder-voiced."

"But do these gods not fight with knives--long knives and short?"
inquired the lad. "I have heard it said that they sometimes fall out
over the ordering of their affairs, even as we mortals do."

"And what wonderful knives they are," cried the old gossip. "They are
coloured like ice. They gleam in the sunlight, like a flash of lightning
against a cloud. They cut quicker than thought, and the red blood
follows the edge as surely as the rains follow April."

"I have yet to see these gods," replied Ouenwa, "and in my heart I pray
that they be but men, for the gods have proved themselves but cheerless
companions to our people."

At that Soft Hand looked up. "Are the seasons not arranged to your
liking, boy?" he asked, quietly.

"Nay, I did not mean that," cried Ouenwa; "but strange men promise
better and safer company than strange gods."

Now he was journeying toward the ocean of his dreaming and the ports of
his desire. His eyes would search the headlands of fog. Out of the east,
and the sun's bed, would lift the magic canoes of the strangers. But the
journey was a hard one. The boy's only companion was a man of small
stature and unheroic spirit, whom the old chief could well spare. They
took their way down the frozen, snow-drifted lake, dragging their food
and sleeping-bags of skin on a rough sledge. The wind came out of a
steel-blue sky, unshifting and relentless. The dry snow ran before it
over the level surface, and settled in thin, white ridges across their
path. At the approach of night they sought the wooded shore, and in the
shelter of the firs built their fire.

During the journey Ouenwa's guide proved but a cheerless companion. He
had no heart for any adventure that might take him beyond the scent of
his people's cooking-fires. He considered the conversation of his young
master but a poor substitute for the gossip of the lodges. The scant
fare of his own cooking left his stomach uncomforted. He hated the
weariness of the march and dreaded the silence of the night. The cry of
the wind across the tree-tops was, to his craven ear, the voice of some
evil spirit. The barking of a fox on the hill set his limbs a-tremble.
The howl of a wolf struck him cold. The sudden leaping of a hare in the
underbrush was enough to shake his poor wits with fright. But he feared
the anger of Soft Hand more than all these terrors, and so held to
Ouenwa and his mission.

On the third day of the journey the blue sky thickened to gray, the wind
veered, and a great storm of snow overtook them. The snowflakes were
large and damp. The travellers turned aside and climbed the bank of the
river to the thickets of evergreens. With their rude axes of stone they
broke away the fir boughs and reared themselves a shelter in the heart
of the wood. Into this they drew their sledge of provisions and their
sleeping-bags. Then they collected whatever dry fuel they could
find--dead twigs and branches, tree-moss and birch bark--and, with his
ingenious contrivance of bow and notched stick, Ouenwa started a blaze.
They roasted dried venison by holding it to the flame on the ends of
pointed sticks. Each cooked what he wanted, and ate it without talk. All
creation seemed shrouded in silence. There was not a sound save the
occasional soft hiss of a melting snowflake in the fire. The storm
became denser. It was as if a sudden, colourless night had descended
upon the wilderness, blotting out even the nearer trees with its reeling
gray. The old retainer crouched low, and gazed out at the storm from
between his bony knees. His eyes fairly protruded with superstitious
terror.

"What do you see?" inquired Ouenwa. The awe of the storm was creeping
over his courage like the first film of ice over a bright stream. The
old man did not move. He did not reply. Ouenwa drew closer to him, and
heaped dry moss on the fire. It glowed high, and splashed a ruddy circle
of light on the eddying snowflakes as on a wall.

"Hark!" whispered the old man. Yes, it was the sound of muffled
footsteps, approaching behind the impenetrable curtain of the storm. The
boy's blood chilled and thinned like water in his veins. He clutched his
companion with frenzied hands. The fear of all the devils and shapeless
beings of the wilderness was upon him. In the whirling snow loomed a
great figure. It emerged into the glow of the fire.

"Ah! ah!" cried the old man, cackling with relief. For their visitor was
nothing more terrible than a fellow human. The stranger greeted them
cordially, and told them that, but for the glow of their fire, he would
have been lost.

"But what are you doing here--an old man and a child?" he asked.

Ouenwa told him. He explained his identity, and his intention of
dwelling with the great arrow-maker of his grandfather's tribe to learn
wisdom.

"Then are we well met," replied the other, "for my lodge is not half a
spear-throw from the lodge of the arrow-maker. The old man has been as a
father to me since the day he saved my wife from death. Now I hunt for
him, and work at his craft, and have left the river to be near him. My
children play about his lodge. My wife broils his fish and meat. Truly
the old man has changed since the return of laughter and friendship to
his lodge."

The stranger's name was Black Feather. He was taller than the average
Beothic, and broad of shoulder in proportion. His hair was brown, and
one lock of it, which was worn longer than the rest, was plaited with
jet-black feathers. His garments consisted of a shirt of beaver skins
that reached half-way between hip and knee, trousers of dressed leather,
and leggins and moccasins of the same material. Around his waist was a
broad belt, beautifully worked in designs of dyed porcupine quills. His
head was uncovered.

Black Feather seated himself beside Ouenwa, and replied, good-naturedly,
and at great length, to the youth's many questions. He told of the
high-walled ships, and of how he had once seen four of these monsters
swinging together in the tide, with little boats plying between them,
and banners red as the sunset flapping above them. He told of trading
with the strangers, and described their manner of spreading out lengths
of bright cloth, knives and hatchets of gray metal, and flasks of strong
drink.

"Their knives are edged with magic," he said. "Many of them carry
weapons called muskets, which kill at a hundred paces, and terrify at
even a greater distance. But a nimble bowman might loose four arrows in
the time that they are conjuring forth the spirit of the musket."

The storm continued throughout the day and night, but the morning broke
clear. The travellers crawled from their weighted shelter and looked
with gratitude upon the silver shield of the sun. After a hearty
breakfast, they set out on the last stage of their journey. Their
racquets of spruce wood woven across with strips of caribou hide sank
deep in the feathery snow, and lifted a burden of it at every step. But
they held cheerfully on their way. Black Feather walked ahead, and Pot
Friend, the old gossip, brought up the rear. The thong by which they
dragged the sledge passed over the right shoulder of each, and was
grasped in the right hand. After several hours of tramping along the
level of the river's valley, Black Feather turned toward the western
bank and led them into the woods. Presently, after experiencing several
difficulties with the sledge, they emerged on the barren beyond the
fringe of timber. They ascended a treeless knoll that rounded in front
of them, blindingly white against the pale sky. Old Pot Friend grumbled
and sighed, and might just as well have been on the sledge, for all the
pulling he did. On reaching the top of the knoll Black Feather swept his
arm before him with a gesture of finality. "Behold!" he said.

An exclamation of wonder sprang to Ouenwa's lips, and
died--half-uttered. Before him lay a wedge of foam-crested winter sea
beating out against a far, glass-clear horizon. To right and left were
sheer rocks and timbered valleys, wave-washed coves, ice-rimmed islands,
and crouching headlands. Even Pot Friend forgot his weariness and
shortness of breath for the moment, and surveyed the outlook in silence.
It was many years since he had been so far afield. His little soul was
fairly stunned with awe. But presently his real nature reasserted
itself. He pointed with his hand.

"Smoke!" he exclaimed. "And the roofs of two lodges. Good!"

Black Feather smiled. Ouenwa did not hear the old man's cry of joy.

"I see the edge of the world," he said.

"But the ships come over it, and go down behind it," replied Black
Feather.

"That is foolishness," said Pot Friend, who was filled with his old
impudence at sight of the fire and the lodges. "No canoe would venture
on the great salt water. I say it, who have built many canoes. And, if
they voyaged so far, they would slip off into the caves of the Fog
Devils. I believe nothing of all these stories of the strangers and
their winged canoes."

"Silence!" cried the boy, turning on him with flashing eyes. "What do
you know of how far men will venture?--you, who have but heart enough to
stir a pot of broth and lick the spoon."

"I have brought you safely through great dangers," whined the old
fellow.

Montaw, the aged arrow-maker, welcomed his visitors cordially, and was
grateful for the kind messages from his chief, Soft Hand, and for the
gift of dressed leather. He accepted the charge and education of Ouenwa.
He set the unheroic Pot Friend to the tasks of carrying water and wood,
and snaring hares and grouse. He taught Ouenwa the craft of chipping
flints into shapes for spear-heads and arrow-heads, and the art of
painting, in ochre, on leather and birch bark.




CHAPTER V.

THE ADMIRAL OF THE HARBOUR


Spring brought ice-floes and bergs from the north, and millions of
Greenland seals. For weeks the little bay on which Montaw and Black
Feather had their lodges was choked with battering ice-pans and crippled
bergs. Many of the tribesmen came to the salt water to kill the seals.
Soft Hand sent a canoe-load of beaver pelts to Ouenwa, so that the boy
might trade with the strangers when they arrived out of the waste of
waters.

At last summer came to the great Bay of Exploits, and with it many
ships--ships of England, of France, of Spain, and of Portugal. All were
in quest of the world-renowned codfish. By this time the ice had rotted,
and drifted southward. The first craft to enter Wigwam Harbour (as the
English sailors called the arrow-maker's bay) was the Devon ship, _Heart
of the West_. Her master, John Trowley, was an ignorant, hard-headed,
and hard-fisted old mariner of the roughest type; but, by the laws of
those waters, he was Admiral of Wigwam Harbour for that season. It was
not long before every harbour had its admiral,--in every case the master
of the first vessel to drop anchor there. The shores were portioned off
in strips, so that each ship might have a place for drying-stages,
whereon to cure its fish. Then the great business of garnering that rich
harvest of the north began, amid the rattling of boat-gear, the shouting
of orders in many tongues, and the volleying of oaths. Ouenwa, watching
the animated scene, was fired with a desire to voyage in one of the
strange vessels, and to taste the world that lay beyond the rim of the
sea.

One day, soon after their arrival, three men from the _Heart of the
West_ ascended the twisting path to the arrow-maker's lodge. The old
craftsman and Black Feather and Ouenwa advanced to meet them without
fear, for up to that time the adventurers and the natives had been on
the best of terms. The strangers smiled and bowed to the Beothics. They
displayed a handful of coloured glass beads, a roll of red cloth, and a
few sticks of tobacco. Old Montaw's eyes glistened at sight of the
Virginian leaf. He had already learned the trick of drawing on the stem
of a pipe and blowing fragrant clouds of smoke into the air. He said
that to do so added to the profundity of his thoughts. And all winter he
had gone without a puff. He produced a mink skin from his lodge and
exchanged it for one of the coveted sticks of tobacco. Black Feather
also traded, giving skins of mink, fox, and beaver for a piece of cloth,
a dozen beads, and a knife. But Ouenwa stood aside and watched the
strangers. One of them he recognized as the great captain who shouted
and swore at the captains of the other ships, and pointed out to them
places where they might anchor their ships--for it was none other than
Master John Trowley. The young man with the gold lace in his hat, and
the long sword at his side--surely, he, too, was a chief, despite his
quiet voice and smooth face. Ouenwa's surmise was correct. The youth was
Master Bernard Kingswell, only son of a wealthy widow of Bristol. His
father, who had been knighted a few years before his premature death,
had been a merchant of sound views and adventurous spirit. The son
inherited the adventurous spirit, and was free from the bondage of the
counting-house. The third of the party was a common seaman. That much
Ouenwa could detect at a glance.

Master Kingswell stepped over to the young Beothic.

"Trade?" he inquired, kindly, displaying a string of glass beads in the
palm of his hand. Ouenwa shook his head. He knew only such words of
English as Montaw had taught him, and he feared that they would prove
entirely inadequate for the purpose that was in his mind. However, he
would try. He pointed to Trowley's ship, and then to the far and
glinting horizon.

"Take Ouenwa?" he whispered, scarce above his breath.

"To see the ship?" inquired Master Kingswell.

"Off," replied Ouenwa, with a wave of his arms. "Out, off!"

Kingswell looked puzzled, and made no reply. The young Beothic bent a
keen glance upon him; then he tapped himself on the chest.

"Take Ouenwa," he whispered. He plucked the Englishman by the coat.
"Come, chief, come," he cried, eagerly.

Kingswell followed to the nearest lodge. Ouenwa pulled aside the flap of
caribou hide that covered the doorway, and motioned for the visitor to
enter. For a second the Englishman hesitated. He had heard many tales of
the treachery of these people. What menace might not lurk in the gloom
of the round, fur-scented lodge? But he did not lack courage; and,
before the other had time to notice the hesitation, he stepped within.
The flap of rawhide fell into place behind him. Save for the red glow
that pulsated from the hearthstone in the centre of the floor, and the
fingers of sunlight that thrust through the cracks in the apex of the
roof, the big lodge was unilluminated.

"What do you want?" asked Master Kingswell, with his shoulders against
the slope of the roof and a tentative hand on his sword-hilt. For
answer, Ouenwa held a torch of rolled bark to the fire until it flared
smoky red, and then lifted it high. The light of it flooded the sombre
place, showing up the couches of skins, Montaw's copper pot, and a great
bale of pelts. The boy pointed to the pelts. Then he pressed the palm of
his hand against the Englishman's breast.

"Ouenwa give beaver," he said. "Take Ouenwa Englan'. Much good trade."

Kingswell understood. But he saw obstacles in the way of carrying out
the young Beothic's wish. The other savages might object. They might
look on it as a case of kidnapping. Lads had been kidnapped before from
the eastern bays, and, though they had been well treated, and made pets
of in England, their people had ceased to trade with the visitors, and
all their friendship had turned to treachery and hostility. On the other
hand, he should like to take the youth home with him. He tried to
explain his position to Ouenwa, but failed signally. They parted,
however, with the most friendly feelings toward one another.

After the interview with Kingswell, Ouenwa spent most of his time gazing
longingly at the ships in the bay, and picturing the life aboard them,
and the countries from which they had come. One morning Kingswell called
to him from the land-wash. He ran down, delighted at the attention.
Kingswell pointed to a small, open boat which the carpenter of the
_Heart of the West_ had just completed. Then, by signs and a few words,
he told Ouenwa that he was going northward in the little craft, to
explore the coast, and that he would be back with the fleet before the
birch leaves were yellow. Ouenwa begged to be taken on the expedition
and afterward across the seas. He offered his canoe-load of beaver
skins. He tried to tell of his great desire to see the lodges of the
strangers, and to learn their speech. He did not want to live the life
of his own people. Kingswell caught the general trend of the Beothic's
remarks. He had no objection to driving a good bargain. So he made clear
to him that he was to come alongside the ship, with the beaver skins, on
the following night.

The sky was black with clouds, and a fog wrapped the harbour, when
Ouenwa stepped into his loaded canoe and pushed out toward the spot
where Trowley's ship lay at anchor. He had dragged his skins from
Montaw's lodge earlier in the night, without disturbing the slumbers of
either his guardian or Pot Friend. Age had dulled their ears and
thickened their sleep. He paddled noiselessly. Sounds of roistering came
to his ears, muffled by the fog. Presently the admiral's ship loomed
close ahead. Lights blinked fore and aft. She seemed a tremendous thing
to the lad, though in truth she was but of one hundred tons. Singing and
laughter were ripe aboard.

For the first time a fear of the strangers took possession of Ouenwa.
Even his trust in Kingswell faltered. He ceased paddling, and listened,
with bated breath, to the hoarse shouts of merriment and the clapping
oaths. Then curiosity overcame his fear. He slid his long canoe under
the stem of the _Heart of the West_. A cheering glow of candle-light
yellowed the fog above him. He stood up and found that his head was on a
level with the sill of a square port. It stood open. He heard
Kingswell's voice, and Trowley's. The master-mariner's was gusty and
argumentative. It broke out at intervals, like the flapping of a sail.

Ouenwa steadied himself with his hands on the casing of the open port,
and lifted to tiptoe. Now he could see into the little cabin, and hear
the conversation of its inmates. Happily for his feelings, he could
understand only a word or two of that conversation. He saw Kingswell and
the master of the ship seated opposite one another at a small table.
Upon the table stood candles in metal sticks, a bottle, and glasses. The
old sea-dog's bearded face was working with excitement. He slapped his
great flipper-like hand on the polished surface of the board.

"Now who be master o' this ship?" he bawled. "Tell me that, will 'e. Who
be master?"

"I am the owner, you'll kindly remember, John Trowley," replied
Kingswell, with a ring of anger in his voice, but a smile on his lips.

"Ay, ye be owner, but John Trowley be skipper," roared the other,
glaring so hard that his round, pale eyes fairly bulged from his face.
"An' no dirty redskin sails in ship o' mine unless as a servant, or
afore the mast,--no, not if he pays his passage with all th' pelts in
Newfoundland."

"You are mistaken, my friend," replied Kingswell. "I'll carry fifty of
these people back to Bristol, if it so pleases me."

"I'll put ye in irons, my fine gentleman," retorted the seaman.

"You are drunk," cried the young adventurer, drawing back his right hand
as if to strike the great, scowling face that bent toward him across the
table.

"Drunk, d'ye say! An' ye'd lift yer hand against the ship's master,
would ye?" shouted Trowley. He lurched forward, and a knife flashed
above the overturned bottle and glasses.

Ouenwa emitted a horrified scream, and hurled his paddle spear-wise into
the cabin. The rounded point of the blade caught Trowley on the side of
the head, and sent him crashing to the deck.




CHAPTER VI.

THE FANGS OF THE WOLF SLAYER


When Trowley recovered consciousness, he was lying in his berth, with a
bandage around his head. Kingswell looked in at him, smiling in a way
that the old mariner was beginning to fear as well as hate.

"I hope you are feeling more amiable since your sleep," said Kingswell.

Trowley muttered a word or two of apology, damned the rum, and asked the
time of day. His recollections of the argument in the cabin were hazy
and fragmentary.

In reply to his question the gentleman told him that the sun was well
up, the fog cleared, and that he was having his boat provisioned for the
coastwise exploration trip.

"And mind you," he added, grimly, "that the eighty beaver skins which
are now being stowed away in my berth are my property."

"Certainly, sir," replied Trowley. "An' may I ask how ye come by such a
power o' trade in a night-time?"

"Yes, you may ask," replied Kingswell. He grinned at the wounded skipper
for fully a minute, leaning on the edge of the bunk. Then he said: "I'll
now bid you farewell until October. Don't sail without me, good Master
Trowley, and look not upon the rum of the Indies when that same is red.
A knife-thrust given in drunkenness might lead to the gallows."

He turned and nimbly scaled the companion-ladder, leaving the shipmaster
speechless with rage.

Half an hour later the staunch little craft _Pelican_ spread her square
sail and slid away from the _Heart of the West_. She was manned by old
Tom Bent, young Peter Harding, and Richard Clotworthy. Master Bernard
Kingswell sat at the tiller, with Ouenwa beside him. Their provisions,
extra clothing, arms, and ammunition were stowed amidships and covered
with sail-cloth. The sun was bright, and the sky blue. The wind bowled
them along at a clipping pace. From a mound above the harbour Black
Feather gazed after them under a level hand. In the little harbour
Trowley's ship alone swung in her anchorage. The others had run out to
the fishing-grounds,--for in those days the fishing was done over the
sides of the ships, and not from small boats. On either side the brown
shores fell back, and the dancing waters widened and widened. White
gulls screamed above and around them, flashing silvery wings, snowy
breasts, and inquisitive eyes.

Ouenwa looked back, and then ahead, and felt a great misgiving. But
Kingswell patted him on the shoulder, and the sailors nodded their heads
at him and grinned.

Soon they were among the fleet. The ungainly, high-sterned vessels
rocked and bobbed under naked spars. The great business that had brought
them so far was going forward. Along both sides of every ship were hung
barrels, and in each barrel was stationed a man with two or more
fishing-lines. Splashing desperately, the great fish were hauled up,
unhooked, and tossed to the deck behind. As the little _Pelican_ slid
by, the fishers paused in their work to cheer her, and wave their caps.
The masters shouted "God speed" from their narrow quarter-decks, and
doffed their hats. Kingswell waved them gracious farewells; Ouenwa gazed
spellbound toward the widening outlook; and Tom Bent trimmed the sail to
a nicety.

They passed headland after headland, rocky island after rocky island,
cove after cove. The shores behind them turned from brown to purple,
and from purple to azure. The waves ran higher and the wind freshened.
Kingswell shaped the boat's course a few points to the northward. The
stout little craft skipped like a lamb and plunged like some less
playful creature. Spray flew over her blunt bows, and the sailors
laughed like children, and called her a brave lass, and many other
endearing names, as if she were human.

"A smart wench, sir," said Tom Bent to Master Kingswell. The commander
nodded, and shifted the tiller knowingly. His blue eyes were flashing
with the excitement of the speed and motion. His bright, pale hair
streamed in the wind. He leaned forward, to pick out the course through
a group of small islands that cluttered the bay ahead of them. He gave
an order, and the seamen hauled on the wet sheet. But Ouenwa did not
share the high spirits of his companions. A terrible, unknown feeling
got hold of him. His dark cheeks lost their bloom. Kingswell glanced at
him.

"Let it go, lad," he said. "A sailor is made in this way. Tom, pass me
along a blanket."

With his unemployed hand he fixed a comfortable rest for the boy, and
helped him to a drink of water. For an hour or more he maintained a hold
on the young Beothic's belt, for, by this time, the soaring and sinking
of the _Pelican_ were enough to unsteady even a seasoned mariner. As
for Ouenwa!--the poor lad simply clung to the gunwale with the grip of
despair, and entertained regretful, beautiful visions of level shores
and unshaken hills. Tom Bent eyed him kindly.

"The young un has it wicked, sir," he said. "Maybe, like as not, a swig
o' rum ud sweeten his bilge, sir."

Kingswell acted on the old tar's advice. The rank liquor completed the
boy's breakdown. In so doing it served the purpose which Bent had
intended. The sufferer was soon sleeping soundly, already half a sailor.

When Ouenwa next took interest in his surroundings, the _Pelican_ had
the surf of a sheer coast close aboard on her port side. She was heading
due north. The sun was half-way down his western slope. Behind the
_Pelican's_ bubbling wake, hills and headlands and high, naked barrens
lay brown and purple and smoky blue. In front, and on the right hand,
loomed surf-rimmed islands and flashed the innumerable, ever-altering
yet unchanged hills and valleys of the deep. Tom Bent was now at the
tiller, and Kingswell was in the bows, gazing intently at the austere
coast. Ouenwa crawled over the thwarts and cargo of provisions, under
the straining sail, and crouched beside him. His head felt light and
his stomach painfully empty, but again life seemed worth living and the
adventure worth while.

About an hour before sunset the _Pelican_ ran into a little cove, and
her two grappling anchors were heaved overboard. She lay within five
yards of the land-wash, swinging on an easy tide. Ouenwa sprang into the
water and waded ashore. It was a dismal anchorage, with only a strip of
shingle, and grim cliffs rising in front and on either hand. But at the
base of the cliffs, in fissures of the rock, grew stunted spruce-trees
and birches. Ouenwa soon found a little stream dribbling a zigzag course
from the levels above. It gathered, clear and cold, in a shallow basin
at the foot of the rock, and from there spilled over into the
obliterating sand.

By this time the others were ashore. Clotworthy hacked down a couple of
armfuls of the spruce and birch shrubs with his cutlass, and started a
fire. Then he filled a pot from the little well and commenced
preparations for a meal. The other seamen erected a shelter, composed of
a sail and three oars, against the cliff. Kingswell and Ouenwa sat on a
convenient boulder, and the commander filled a long pipe with tobacco
and lit it at a brand from the fire. He seemed in high spirits, and in a
mood to further his young companion's education. Pointing to the roll
of Virginian leaf, from which he had cut the charge for his pipe, he
said, "Tobacco." Ouenwa repeated it many times, and nodded his
comprehension. Then Kingswell pointed to old Tom Bent, who was watching
Clotworthy drop lumps of dried venison into the pot of water.

"Boatswain," he said.

Ouenwa mastered the word, as well as the term "able seamen," applied to
Clotworthy and Peter Harding. By that time the stew was ready for them.
They were all sound asleep, under their frail shelter, before the last
glimmer of twilight was gone from the sky.

It was very early when Ouenwa awoke. A pale flood of dawn illumined the
tent and the recumbent forms of Master Kingswell and Clotworthy. Tom
Bent and Harding were not in their places. The boy wondered at that, but
was about to close his eyes again, when he was startled to his feet by a
shrill cry that went ringing overhead and echoing along the cliffs. He
darted from the tent, with Kingswell and Clotworthy hot on his heels.
Bent and Harding were on the extreme edge of the beach, with their backs
to the sea, staring upward. Ouenwa and the others turned their faces in
the same direction. They were amazed to see about a dozen native
warriors on the cliff above them, fully armed, and evidently deeply
interested in what was going on in the little cove. One of them was
pointing to the _Pelican_, and talking vehemently to the brave beside
him. In two of them Ouenwa recognized young Wolf Slayer, and his father,
the chief of the village on the River of Three Fires. He called up to
them, and asked what brought them so far from their village.

"We are at the salt water to take the fish," replied Wolf Slayer, "and
we saw the smoke of your fire before the last darkness. But what do you
with the great strangers, little Dreamer?"

"They are my friends," replied Ouenwa, "and I am voyaging with them to
learn wisdom."

"What are you talking about?" asked Kingswell.

The lad tried to explain. He pointed to the tent and provisions and then
to the boat. "Put in," he said.

At a word from Kingswell the three sailors quickly dismantled their
night's shelter and carried the sail, the oars, and such food and
blankets as they had brought ashore, out to the _Pelican_. At that the
shrill cry rang out again, and echoed along the cliffs.

"What does that mean?" inquired Kingswell.

"Bad," replied Ouenwa, shortly.

"What is in your fine canoe, little Dreamer?" called Wolf Slayer.

"Our food and our clothing, little Fox Stabber," Ouenwa cried back, with
indignation in his voice.

"Your dreams must have unsettled your wits, my friend," replied Wolf
Slayer, "or you would not talk so loud before a chief of the tribe."

Just then, in answer to the cry that had sounded so dismally across the
dawn a few moments before, five more warriors, armed with bows, appeared
on the top of the cliff--for the cry was the hunting-call of the tribe.

"Do you fish with war-bows?" shouted Ouenwa. "And why do you summon to
trade with the cry of the hunt?"

"You ask too many questions, even for a seeker of wisdom," replied the
other youth, mockingly.

"Does Soft Hand, the great bear, slumber, that the foxes bark with such
assurance?" retorted Ouenwa.

By this time the _Pelican_ was ready to put out of the cove. Both
anchors were up, and Harding and Clotworthy held her off with the oars.
Old Tom Bent was also in the boat, busy with something beside the mast.
Suddenly a bow-string twanged, and an arrow buried its flint head in the
sand at Kingswell's feet. Another struck a stone and, glancing out,
rattled against Harding's oar. Kingswell and Ouenwa backed hastily into
the water. Above them, silhouetted against the lightening sky, they saw
bending bows and downward thrust arms. Then, with a clap and a roar, and
a gust of smoke, old Tom Bent replied to the warriors on the cliff. The
echoes of the discharge bellowed around and around the rock-girt
harbour. Ouenwa and Kingswell sprang through the smoke and climbed
aboard, and the seamen pushed into deep water and then bent to their
oars. But the _Pelican_ proved a heavy boat to row, with her blunt bows
and comfortable beam. She surged slowly beyond the cloud of bitter smoke
that the musket had hung in the windless air. Clear of that, the
voyagers looked for their treacherous assailants--and, behold, the great
warriors were not to be seen. Kingswell and the three seamen laughed, as
if the incident were a fine joke; but Ouenwa was hot with shame and
anger. He stood erect and shouted abuse to the deserted cliff-top. He
called upon Wolf Slayer and Panounia to show their cowardly faces. He
threatened them with the displeasure of Soft Hand and with the anger of
the English. A figure appeared on the sky-line.

"You speak of Soft Hand," it cried. "Know you, then, that Soft Hand set
out on the Long Trail four suns ago, when he marched into my village to
dispute my power. I, Panounia, am now the great chief of the people. So
carry yourself accordingly, O whelp without teeth and without a den to
crawl into. Whose hand has overthrown the lodge of the totem of the
Black Bear? Mine! Panounia's! Soft Hand has fallen under it as his son,
your father, succumbed to it when you were a squalling babe." He paused
for a moment, and held out a gleaming knife, with its point toward the
_Pelican_. "The totem of the Wolf now hangs from the great lodge," he
cried.

Quick and noiseless as a breath, the edge of the cliff was lined with
warriors. Like a sudden flight of birds their arrows flashed outward and
downward.

"Lie down!" cried Kingswell. With a strong hand he snatched Ouenwa to
the bottom of the boat. Harding and Clotworthy sprawled forward between
the thwarts. Only Tom Bent, crouched beside the naked mast, did not
move. The arrows thumped against plank and gunwale. They pierced the
cargo. They glanced from tiller and sweep and mast. One, turning from
the rail, struck Bent on the shoulder. He cursed angrily, but did not
look for the wound. His match was burning with a thread of blue smoke
and a spark of red fire. His clumsy gun was geared to the rail by an
impromptu swivel of cords. He lay flat and elevated the muzzle.

"Steady her," he said, softly. "She's driftin' in."

Kingswell sprang forward to one of the oars, thrust it to the bottom,
and held the boat as steady as might be. Arrows whispered around him. He
shouted a challenge to the befeathered warriors above him. Tom touched
the slow-match to the quick fuse. Something hissed and sizzled. A plume
of smoke darted up. Then, with a rebound that shook the boat from stem
to stern, the gun hurled forth its lead, and fire, and black breath of
hate.

"Double charge, sir," gasped Tom Bent, from where he sagged against the
mast. The kick of his musket had hurt him more than the blow from the
arrow.

Again the _Pelican_ fought her way toward the open waters, with Harding
and Clotworthy pulling lustily at the sweeps. Kingswell, flushed and
joyful, sat at the tiller and headed her for the channel, through which
the tide was running landward at a fair pace. Bent was busy reloading
his firearm. Ouenwa stood in the stern-sheets, with his bow in his left
hand and an arrow on the string. A breath of wind brushed the smoke
aside and cleared the view. Ouenwa pointed to the beach, and gave vent
to a shrill whoop of triumph. The others looked, and saw a huddled shape
of bronzed limbs and painted leather at the foot of the rock.

"One more red devil for hell," muttered the boatswain. "I learned mun to
shoot his pesky sticks at a Bristol gentleman."

As if in answer, an arrow bit a splinter from the mast, not six inches
from the old man's head. Ouenwa's bow bent, and sprang straight. The
shaft flew with all the skill that Montaw had taught the boy, and with
all the hate that was in his heart for the big murderer on the cliff.
Every man of the little company narrowed his eyes to follow the flight
of it. They saw it curve. They saw a warrior drop his bow from his
menacing hand and sink to his knees.

"The wolf falls," cried Ouenwa, in his own tongue. "The wolf bites the
moss. Who, now, is the wolf slayer?"

The Englishmen cheered again and again, and the good boat _Pelican_,
urged forward by triumphant sinews, won through the channel and swam
into the outer waters.




CHAPTER VII.

THE SILENT VILLAGE


As soon as the _Pelican_ was out of arrow-shot of the cliff, the
Beothics disappeared. Ouenwa laid aside his bow with a sigh of regret.
Then he tried to repeat to Kingswell what he had heard from Panounia.
After a deal of questioning, sign-making, and mental exertion, the
Englishman gathered the information that treachery and murder had taken
place up the river, and that his young friend hated the new leader of
the tribe with a bitter hatred. He did not wonder at the bitterness. He
looked at the young savage's flushed face and glowing eyes with sympathy
and admiration. His liking for the boy had grown in every hour of their
companionship, and, by this time, had developed into a decided fondness.

"Sit down, lad, and let your guns cool," he said, with a light hand on
the other's knee. "Your enemies are my enemies," he continued, "and
we'll fight the dogs every time we see 'em."

Ouenwa sat quiet and tried to look calm. He was soothed by the evident
kindliness of Kingswell's tone and manner, though he had failed to
translate his speech. The men on the thwarts had caught the words,
however. They nodded heavily to one another.

"Ye say the very word what was in my mind, sir," spoke up Tom Bent,
"an', if I may make so bold as to say further, your enemies be your
servants' enemies, sir. Therefore the young un's enemies must be our
enemies, holus bolus." The other sailors nodded decidedly. "Therefore,"
continued Tom Bent, "all they cowardly heathen aft on the cliff has to
reckon, hereafter, with Thomas Bent an' the crew o' this craft."

"Well spoken, Tom," replied Kingswell, with the smile that always won
him the heart and hand of every man he favoured with it,--and of every
maid, too, more than likely. "But we can't enthuse on empty stomachs.
Pass out the bread and the cold meat," he added.

For fully two hours the _Pelican_ rocked about within half a mile of her
night's anchorage. Kingswell was not in a desperate hurry, and so his
men pulled at the oars just enough to hold the boat clear of the rocks.
A sharp lookout was kept along the coast, but not a sight nor a sound
of the Beothics rewarded their vigilance.

"They be up to some devilment, ye may lay to that," said Tom Bent.

At last a wind fluttered to them out of the nor'east, and the square
sail was hoisted and sheeted home. Again the _Pelican_ dipped her bows
and wet her rail on the voyage of exploration.

After two hours of sailing, and just when they were off the mouth of a
little river and a fair valley, a fog overtook them. Kingswell was for
running in, but Ouenwa objected.

"Panounia follow," he said. "He great angry. Drop irons," he added,
pointing to the little anchors.

"Panounia is wounded. You winged him yourself," replied Kingswell. "He
could not follow us around that coast, lad, at the clip we were coming."

Ouenwa considered the words with puckered brows. They were beyond him.
The commander pointed shoreward.

"All safe," he said. "All safe."

"No, no," cried the lad. "All kill. No safe."

During this controversy the sail had been partly lowered, and the
_Pelican_ had been slowly running landward with the fog.

Kingswell looked from the young Beothic to the seamen with a smile of
whimsical uncertainty.

"Out o' the mouths o' babes an' sucklin's," remarked Tom Bent, with his
deep-set eyes fixed on nothing in particular. Kingswell's glance rested,
for a moment, on the ancient mariner.

"Lower away," he said. The sail flapped down, and was quickly stowed.
"Let go the anchors," he commanded. The grapplings splashed into the
gray waves. The fog crawled over the boat and shut her off from land and
sky. With a last dreary whistle, the wind died out entirely.

"Rip me!" exclaimed Master Kingswell, "but here is caution that smells
remarkably like cowardice." Fretfully sighing, he produced his pipe,
tobacco, and tinder-box. Soon the fragrant smoke was mingling with the
fog. The young commander leaned back, taking his comfort where he could,
like the courageous gentleman that he was. The habit of burning
Virginian tobacco was an expensive one, confined to the wealthy and the
adventurous. The seamen, who, of course, had not yet acquired it,
watched their captain with open interest. When a puff was blown through
the nostrils, or sent aloft in a series of rings, they nudged one
another, like children at a show. By this time the walls of fog had made
of the _Pelican_ a tiny, lost world by itself. Suddenly Ouenwa raised
his hand. "Sh!" he whispered. Kingswell removed the pipe-stem from his
mouth, and inclined his head toward the hidden river and valley. All
strained their ears, to wrest some sound from the surrounding gray other
than the lapping of the tide along the unseen land-wash. But they could
hear nothing.

"Village," whispered Ouenwa, pointing landward.

"But we saw no signs of a village," protested Kingswell, gently.

"Village," repeated the lad. "Ouenwa hear. Ouenwa smell."

Immediately the four Englishmen began to sniff the fog, like hounds
taking a scent on the wind. But their nostrils were not the nostrils of
either hounds or Beothics. They sniffed to no purpose. They shook their
heads. Kingswell wagged a chiding finger at their keen-nosed companion.
The boy read the inference of the gesture, and flushed indignantly.

"Village," he whispered, shrilly. "Village, village, village."

Kingswell looked distressed. The sailors grinned leniently at the
determined boy. They had great faith in their own noses, had those
mariners of Bristol and thereabouts. Ouenwa, frowning a little, sank
into a moody contemplation of the fog.

"This is dull," exclaimed Kingswell, after a half-hour of silence.
"Tom, pipe us a stave, like a good lad."

The boatswain scratched his head reflectively. Presently he cleared his
throat with energy.

"Me voice be a bit husky, sir, to what it once were," he murmured, "but
I'll do me best--an' no sailorman can say fairer nor that."

Straightway he struck into a heroic ballad of a sea-fight, in a high,
tottering tenor. The song dealt with Spanish swagger and English daring,
with bloody decks, falling spars, and flying splinters. Harding joined
in the chorus with a booming bass. Clotworthy and the commander soon
followed. Kingswell's voice was clear and strong and wonderfully
melodious. Ouenwa's eyes glowed and his muscles trembled. Though the
words held no meaning for him, the rollicking, dashing swing of the tune
fired his excitable blood. He forgot all about Panounia, and the
suspected village on the river so near at hand ceased to trouble him. He
beat time to the singing with his moccasined feet, and clapped his hands
together in rhythmic appreciation of his comrades' efforts. In time the
ballad was finished. The last member of the craven crew of the _Teressa
Maria_ had tasted English steel and been tossed to the sharks. Then
Master Kingswell sprang to his feet and sang a sentimental ditty. It
was of roses and fountains, of latticed windows and undying affection.
The air was captivating. The singer's voice rang tender and clear. Old
Tom Bent remembered lost years. Harding thought of a Devon orchard, and
of a Devon lass at work harvesting the ruddy fruit. Clotworthy saw a
cottage beside a little wood, and a woman and a little child gazing
seaward and westward from the door.

For several seconds after the last note had died away, the little
company remained silent and motionless, fully occupied with its various
thoughts. Ouenwa was the first to break the spell of the song. He laid
his hand on Kingswell's arm with a quick gesture, and leaned toward him.

"Canoe," he whispered.

The sound that had caught Ouenwa's attention was repeated--a short rap,
like the inadvertent striking of a paddle against a gunwale. They all
heard it, and, with as little noise as possible, set to work at getting
out cutlasses and loading muskets. Kingswell crawled forward and
whispered with old Tom Bent. The boatswain nodded and turned to Harding.
That sturdy young seaman crawled to the bows and placed his hands on the
hawser of the forward anchor. He looked aft. Kingswell, who had returned
to his seat at the tiller, leaned over the stern and cut the manilla
rope that tethered the boat at that end. Harding immediately pulled on
his rope until he was directly over the light bow anchor. Then, strongly
and slowly, and without noise, he brought the four-fingered iron up and
into the bows. They were free of the bottom, anyway, and with the loss
of only one anchor. Kingswell breathed a sigh of relief.

The _Pelican_ drifted, and the crew stared into the fog, with wide eyes
and alert ears. Then, to seaward and surely not ten yards away, sounded
a plover-call. Kingswell signalled to Bent to man the seaward side and
Clotworthy and Harding the other. They rested the barrels of their great
matchlocks on the gunwales. Suddenly the prow of a canoe pierced the
curtain of fog not four yards from Tom Bent. He touched the match to the
short fuse. There was a terrific report, and a chorus of wild yells. In
the excitement that followed, the others discharged their pieces.
Kingswell grabbed an oar, slipped it into a notch beside the tiller and
began to "scull" the boat seaward. The men reloaded their muskets and
peered into the fog. They heard splashings and cries on all sides, but
could see nothing. Ouenwa, standing erect, discharged arrow after arrow
at the hidden enemy.

The splashings grew fainter, and the cries ceased entirely. Kingswell
passed the oar which he had been using to Harding, and told the men to
lay aside their muskets and row. Ouenwa let fly his last arrow, in the
names of his murdered father and grandfather.

For a long and weary time the _Pelican_ lay off the hidden land,
shrouded in fog and silence. A few hours before sunset a wind from the
west found her out, drove away the fog, and disclosed the sea and the
coast and the open sky.

"Pull her head 'round," commanded Kingswell, "and hoist the sail. We are
going back to have a look at that village."

The men obeyed eagerly. They were itching for a chance to repay the
savages for the fright in the dark.




CHAPTER VIII.

A LETTER FOR OUENWA


Two headlands were rounded before the valley of the river opened again
to the eyes of the adventurers. The brown water of the stream stole down
and merged into the dancing, wind-bitten sea. The gradual hillsides,
green-swarded, basked in the golden light. The lower levels of the
valley were already in shadow. No sign of man, or of his habitation, was
disclosed to the voyagers.

"A fair spot," remarked Kingswell. "I feel a desire stirring within me
to stretch my legs on that grassy bank. What do you say to the idea,
Tom?"

The old fellow grinned. "'Twould be pleasant, sir, an' no mistake," he
replied--"a little walk along the brook, with our hands not very far
from our hangers. Ay, sir, Tom Bent's for a spell o' nater worship."

The boat ran in, and was beached on the sand well within the mouth of
the river. Harding and Clotworthy, with loaded muskets, were left on
guard, and the other three, fully armed, started along the bank of the
stream. They advanced cautiously, with a sharp lookout on every clump of
bushes and every spur of rock. A kingfisher dropped from its perch above
the water and flew up-stream with shrill clamour. They turned a bend of
the little river and halted short in their track with muttered
exclamations. Before them, on a level meadow between the brown waters of
the stream and the dark green wall of the forest, stood half a dozen
wigwams. The place seemed deserted. They scanned the dark edge of the
wood and the brown hills behind. They peered everywhere, expecting to
catch the glint of hostile eyes at every turn. But neither grove nor
hill, nor silent lodge, disclosed any sign of life.

"Where the devil are they?" exclaimed Kingswell, thoroughly perplexed.

Ouenwa smiled, and swept his hand in a half-circle.

"Watch us," he remarked, nodding his head. "Yes, watch us."

"He means they are lying around looking at us," said Kingswell to the
boatswain. "Rip me, but I don't relish the chance of one of those
stone-tipped arrows in my vitals."

Tom Bent glanced about him in visible trepidation. Ouenwa noticed it,
and pointed to the seaman's musket. "No 'fraid," he said. "Shoot."

"What at?" inquired Bent.

"Make shoot," cried the boy, indicating the silent wood, dusky in the
gathering shadows.

"He wants you to fire into the wood, and frighten them out," said
Kingswell.

"If they be there, I'm for lettin' 'em stay there," replied Tom.

However, he fixed his murderous weapon in its support, aimed at the edge
of the forest beyond the wigwams, and fired. The flame cut across the
twilight like a red sword; a dismal howl arose and quivered in the air.
It was answered from the hilltops on both sides of the stream.

Before the echoes had died away, Ouenwa was inside the nearest lodge.
Kingswell followed, and found him dismantling the couches and walls of
their valuable furs. He instantly took a hand in the looting. Soon each
had all he could handle. They carried their burdens from the lodge, and,
with Tom as a rear-guard, marched back toward the _Pelican_. They had
rounded the bend of the river, and the two seamen were hurrying to meet
them, when old Tom Bent suddenly uttered an indignant whoop and leaped
into the air. His musket flew from his shoulder and clattered against a
stone. Kingswell and Ouenwa threw down their bundles and sprang to where
he lay, kicking and spluttering. The feathered shaft of an arrow clung
to the middle of his left thigh. He was swearing wildly, and vowing
vengeance on the "heathen varment" who had pinked him.

Harding and Clotworthy fired into the shadows of the wooded hillside,
and Kingswell hoisted the struggling boatswain to his shoulders and
continued his advance on the boat. The old sailor begged and implored
his commander to put him down, assuring him that he was more surprised
than hurt. But Kingswell turned a deaf ear to his entreaties, and did
not release him until they were safe beside the _Pelican's_ bows. Just
then Ouenwa and the sailors came running up with the looted pelts. All
were puzzled. Why had the hidden enemy fired only one arrow, when they
might have annihilated the little party with a volley?

That night the _Pelican_ lay at anchor in the mouth of the river. Twice,
during the long, eerie hours between dark and dawn, the man on duty woke
his companions; but on both occasions the alarms proved to be false--the
splashing of a marauding otter near the shore or the flop of a feeding
trout. Under the pale lights of the morning the valley and the stream
lay as peaceful and deserted as on the preceding evening. The voyagers
ate their breakfast aboard. Then, as soon as the sun had cleared the
light mist from the water, they got up their anchor and rowed up-stream.
Harding and Clotworthy pulled on the oars. Bent and the commander
crouched in the bows, with ready muskets, and Ouenwa sat at the tiller.
The current was strong, and the boat crawled slowly against the twirling
sinews of water. Little patches of spindrift, from some fall or rapid
farther up the river, floated past them. The pebbly bottom flashed
beneath the amber tide. Leaping fish gleamed and splashed on either
hand, and sent silver circles rippling to the toiling boat. A moist,
sweet fragrance of foliage and mould and dew filled the air.

Soon the deserted lodges came into view, standing smokeless and pathetic
between the murmuring river and the brooding trees. Kingswell motioned
to Ouenwa to head for the low bank in front of the wigwams. They landed
without incident, and all walked toward the village, with their firearms
ready and their matches lighted. They explored every lodge and even beat
the underbrush. The dwellings had been cleared of pelts and weapons and
cooking utensils evidently during the night. A village of this size must
have possessed at least six canoes; but not a canoe, nor so much as a
paddle, could they find.

"All run in canoe," remarked Ouenwa, pointing up-stream.

"What be this?" asked Tom Bent, limping toward Kingswell with an arrow
and a small square of birch bark in his hand. He had found the bark,
pinned by the arrow, to the side of one of the wigwams. Kingswell
examined it intently, and shook his head.

"Pictures," he said. "I suppose it is a letter of some kind, in which
their wise man tells us what he thinks of us."

Ouenwa took the bark and surveyed the roughly sketched figures, with
which it was covered, with a scornful twist of his face.

"Wolf," he said, indicating the central figure. "See! Very big!
Bear"--he touched another point of the missive and then tapped his own
breast--"see bear! Him no big! Wolf eat bear." He laughed shrilly, and
shook his head. "No, no," he said. "No, no."

"What be mun jabberin' about?" muttered Tom Bent.

Kingswell explained that the bear stood for Ouenwa's family, and that
the wolf was the symbol of the people who had killed his grandfather.

The _Pelican_ continued her voyage before noon, and all day skirted an
austere and broken coast. She crossed the mouths of many wide bays,
steering for the purple headlands beyond. She rounded many islands and
braved intricate channels. Toward evening she rounded a bluffer, grimmer
cape than any of the day's experience, and Kingswell, who had just
relieved Harding at the tiller, forsook the straight course and headed
up the bay. Two hours of brisk sailing brought them to a sheltered
roadstead behind an island and just off a wooded cove. They lowered the
sail and rowed in close to the beach. They built no fire, and spent the
night close to the tide, with their muskets and cutlasses beside them,
and the watch changed every two hours.

Three days later the voyagers happened upon a ship. They ran close in to
where she lay at anchor, believing her to be English, and did not
discover their mistake until the little tub of a brig opened fire from a
brass cannonade. The first shot went wide, and the _Pelican_ lay off
with a straining sail. The second shot fell short, and that ended the
encounter, for the Frenchmen were too busy fishing to get up anchor and
give chase.

Old Tom Bent was quite cast down over the incident. "It be the first
time," he said, "that I ever seen a Frencher admiral o' a bay in
Newfoundland. One year I were fishin' in the _Maid o' Bristol_, in Dog's
Harbour, Conception, an', though we was last to drop anchor, an' the
only English ship agin six Frenchers and two Spanishers, by Gad, our
skipper said he were admiral--an', by Gad, so he were."

But the valorous old mariner did not suggest that they put about and
dispute the admiralty of the little harbour which they had just passed.




CHAPTER IX.

AN UNCHARTERED PLANTATION


In a cave in White Bay the voyagers traded with a party of friendly
natives. Farther north they found indications of copper, and collected a
bagful of the mother rock. In late August a sickness prostrated Master
Kingswell and Clotworthy, and camp was made on the mainland. For three
weeks the sufferers were unable to lift their heads. They lost flesh
until they were little more than skin and bone. Ouenwa undertook the
dual position of physician and nurse. He had some knowledge of the
science of medicine, as practised by the Beothics, and treated the
malady with teas of roots and herbs. He also managed to kill a young
caribou, and fed his patients with broth made from the meat. But it was
close upon the end of September when the _Pelican_ again took up her
northward journey.

Kingswell's real reason for this adventurous cruise was the quest of
gold. Other explorers had seen gold ore in the possession of the
natives, and he had heard stories of a French sailor having been
wounded by a gold-barbed arrow. But the precious metal eluded him. Upon
gaining the farthest cape of the great island, he wanted to cross the
straits and continue his search along the Labrador coast; but the men
shook their heads. The boat was too small for the voyage. Their
provisions were running low. The northern summer was already far spent.
So Kingswell headed the _Pelican_ southward. After a week of fair winds,
they were caught in a squall, and the starboard bow of their stout
little craft was shattered while they were in the act of winning to a
sheltered anchorage. Everything was salvaged; but it took them three
days to patch the boat back to a seaworthiness. Even after this
unlooked-for delay, the young commander persisted in exploring every
likely looking cave and river mouth that had been neglected on the
northward trip. The men grumbled sometimes, but it was not in the heart
of any sailor to deny the wishes of so charming and brave a gentleman as
Master Kingswell. Ouenwa's long conversations in his partially acquired
English helped to keep the company in good spirits.

It was November, and nipping weather in that northern bay, when the
_Pelican_ threaded the islands of Exploits and opened Wigwam Harbour to
the eager gaze of her company. The harbour was empty! They had not
sighted a vessel in any of the outer reaches of the bay. The
drying-stages and fish stores stood deserted above the green tide.

Kingswell turned a bloodless face toward his men. "They have sailed for
home without us," he said, and swallowed hard. Old Tom Bent gazed
reflectively about him, and scratched a hoary whisker with a mahogany
finger. He had grumbled at the chance of this very disaster, but now
that he was face to face with it the thought of grumbling did not occur
to him.

"Ay, sir," said he, "the damned rascals has sailed without us--an' we
are lucky not to be in such dirty company!"

He spat contemptuously over the gunwale. The colour returned to
Kingswell's cheeks, and a flash of the old humour to his eyes. He smiled
approvingly on the boatswain. But young Peter Harding, being neither as
old nor as wise as Bent, nor as cool-headed as Clotworthy, had something
to say on the subject. He ripped out an oath. Then--"By God," he cried,
"here's one man who'd rather sail in a ship with what ye calls dirty
company, Tom Bent, than starve in a damn skiff with--with you all," he
finished, lamely.

Kingswell and Ouenwa looked at the young seaman with mute indignation
in their eyes. But Tom Bent laughed softly.

"Ay, Peter, boy," he said, "ye be one o' these fine, lion-hearted
English mariners what's the pride o' the king an' the terror o' the
seas. The likes o' ye don't sail shipmates with men, but with the duff
an' the soup an' the prize-money." His voice shrilled a little. "Ay, if
it wasn't that I know ye for a better man than ye sound just now, I'd ax
cap'n's leave to twist the snivellin' nose off the fat face o' ye."

"Tom be right," remarked Clotworthy, with a knowing and well-considered
wag of his heavy head.

Harding, who had delivered his speech from a commanding position on a
thwart, sat down very softly, as if anxious not to attract any further
attention.

"We'll have a look at the old arrow-maker, lads," said Kingswell,
cheerfully, "and stock up with enough dried venison to carry us south to
Trinity, or even to Conception. Ships often lie in those bays till the
snow flies. At the worst we can sail the old _Pelican_ right 'round to
St. John's, and winter there. I'll wager the governor would be glad
enough of a few extra fighting men to scare off the French and the
privateers."

Despite Master Kingswell's brave words, there was no store of dried
venison to be obtained from the arrow-maker, for both the old
philosopher's lodge and Black Feather's were gone--gone utterly, and
only the round, level circles on the sward to show where they had stood.
What had become of Montaw and his friends could only be surmised.
Ouenwa's opinion that the enemies of Soft Hand were responsible for
their disappearance was shared by the Englishman. All agreed that
immediate flight was safer than a further investigation of the mystery.
So the storm-beaten, wave-weary _Pelican_ turned seaward again.

Two days later, toward nightfall, and after having sailed far up an arm
of the sea and into the mouth of a great river, in fruitless search of
some belated fishing-ship, the adventurers were startled and cheered by
the sound of a musket-shot. It came from inland, from up the shadowy
river. It was muffled by distance. It clapped dully on their eager ears
like the slamming of a wooden door. But every lonely heart of them knew
it for the voice of the black powder. They drifted back a little and lay
at anchor all night, just off the mouth of the river. With the dark came
the cruel frost. But they crawled beneath their freight of furs and
slept. They were astir with the first gray lights, and before sunrise
were pulling cautiously up the middle of the channel. White frost
sparkled on thwart and gunwale. Dark, mist-wrapped forests of spruce and
fir and red pine came down to the water on both sides. Here and there a
fang of black rock, noisy with roosting gulls, jutted above the dark
current. A jay screamed in the woods. A belated snipe skimmed across
their bows. An eagle eyed them from the crown of an ancient pine, and
swooped down and away.

They must have ascended the stream a matter of two miles--and hard
pulling it was--when Ouenwa's sharp eyes detected the haze of wood smoke
beyond a wooded bend.

"Cooking-fire there!" he exclaimed. "Maybe get something to eat? Maybe
get killed?"

He spoke cheerfully, as if neither prospect was devoid of charm.

"We'll risk it," remarked Kingswell, quietly. "Put your weight into the
stroke, lads--and, Tom, keep your match handy."

At last the bend was rounded, and the rowers turned on the thwarts and
peered over their shoulders, and Kingswell uttered a low cry of delight.
Close ahead of them the right-hand bank lay level and open, and along
its edge were beached three skiffs. About twenty yards back stood a
little settlement of log cabins enclosed by palisades. From the
chimneys of the cabins plumes of comfortable smoke rose to the clearer
azure above. In front of this civilized spot, in mid-stream, a small
high-pooped vessel lay moored. Her masts and spars were gone. She swung
like a dead body in the brown current.

Tom Bent swore softly and with grave deliberation. "Damn my eyes," he
murmured. "Ay, sir, dash my old figger-head, if there don't lay a
reggler, complete plantation! Blast my eyes!"

"A tidy, Christian appearin' place," remarked Clotworthy, joyously. "An'
real chimleys, too! Well, that do look homely, for certain."

At that moment three men, armed with muskets, ran from the gateway of
the enclosure and stood uncertain half-way between the palisade and the
river. Kingswell hailed them, standing in the bluff bows of the little
_Pelican_. He stated the nationality, the names, and degrees of himself
and the other of the little company, and the manner of their misfortune,
even while the boat was covering the short distance to the shore.

The settlers laid aside their weapons, and received Master Kingswell and
his men with every show of cordiality and good faith. They were
strapping fellows, with weather-tanned faces, broad foreheads, steady
eyes, and herculean shoulders. They doffed their skin caps to the
gentleman adventurer.

"Ye be our first visitors, sir, since we come ashore here two year and
two months ago come to-morrow," said one of the three. "Yes, it be just
two year and two months ago, come to-morrow, that we dropped anchor off
the mouth of this river," he added, turning to his companions. They
agreed silently. Their eyes and attention were fully absorbed by Master
Kingswell's imposing, though sadly stained, yellow boots and gold-laced
coat. Another settler joined the group, and welcomed the voyagers with
sheepish grins. A fifth, arrayed in finery and a sword, approached and
halted near by.

"These," said the spokesman, "be Donnellys--father and son." With a
casual tip of the thumb, he indicated two rugged members of the company.
He turned to a handsome young giant beside him and smote him
affectionately on the shoulder. "This here be my boy John--John
Trigget," he said, "an' that gentleman be Captain Pierre d'Antons." He
bowed, with ungracious deference, to the dark, lean, fashionably dressed
individual who stood a few paces away. "An' my name be William Trigget,
master mariner," he concluded.

Kingswell bowed low for the second time, and again shook hands with the
elder Trigget. Then he stepped over to D'Antons and murmured a few
courteous words in so low a voice that his men caught nothing of them.
Each gentleman laid his left hand lightly on the hilt of his sword. Each
bowed, laced hat in hand, until his long hair fell forward about his
face. D'Antons' locks were raven-black, and straight as a horse's mane.
Young Kingswell's were bright as pale gold, and soft as a woman's. Both
were of goodly proportions and gallant bearing, though the Frenchman was
the taller and thinner of the two.

D'Antons slipped his arm within Kingswell's, and, motioning to the
others to follow, started toward the stockade. William Trigget
immediately strode forward and walked on Master Kingswell's other hand,
as if determined to assert his rights as a leader of the mixed company.
Ouenwa and the seamen of the _Pelican_, and the Donnellys and young
Trigget, followed close on the heels of their superiors.

"And who may ye be, lad?" inquired John Trigget of Ouenwa, as they
crossed the level of frost-seared grass.

"I am Ouenwa," replied the boy, frankly, "and Master Kingswell is my
strong friend and protector. My grandsire was Soft Hand, the head chief
of this country. His enemies--barking foxes who name themselves
wolves--pulled him down in the night-time."

The big settler nodded, and the others uttered ejaculations of pity and
interest. The story was not news to them, however.

"Ay," said John Trigget, "Soft Hand were pulled down in the night, sure
enough. The Injuns run fair crazy, what with murderin' each other an'
burnin' each other's camps. I was huntin', two days to the north, when
the trouble began. I come home without stoppin' to make any objections,
an' the skipper kep' our gates shut for a whole week. They rebels was
for wipin' out everybody; an' they captured two French ships, an' did
for the crews. They be moved away inlan' now, thank God. We be safe till
spring, I'm thinkin'."

"There be worse folks nor they tormentin' Injuns around these here
soundin's, an' ye can take my word for that," growled the elder
Donnelly, in guarded tones.

"Belay that," whispered John Trigget. "The devil can cook his stew
plenty quick enough. Us won't bear a hand till the pot boils over."

Captain d'Antons glanced back at the talkers. His black eyes gleamed
suspiciously.




CHAPTER X.

GENTRY AT FORT BEATRIX


Inside the stockade, posted unevenly around three sides of a foot-worn
square, were five buildings of rough logs. From a platform in the
southeast corner two small cannon presented their muzzles to the river.
At the back of this platform, on the southern side of the square, stood
the Donnelly cabin. It was stoutly built, and measured fifteen paces
across the front. Against the western palisade the Trigget cabin and
Captain d'Antons' habitation faced the square. On the north side stood a
fourth dwelling and a small storehouse. In the centre of the yard
bubbled a spring of clear water under a rustic shed. A tiny brook
sparkled away from it, under the stockade and down to the river. The
well was flanked on both sides by a couple of slim birches, now leafless
under the white November sun.

The visitors were led to the Triggets' cabin, and Skipper Trigget's wife
and daughter--both big, comely women--fed them with the best in the
little plantation. After breakfast, Kingswell and Ouenwa were taken to
D'Antons' quarters. The Frenchman was the spirit of hospitality, and
took blankets and sheets from his own bed to dress their couches. Also
he produced a flask of priceless brandy, from which he and Kingswell
pledged a couple of glasses to the Goddess of Chance. The toast was
D'Antons' suggestion.

Presently D'Antons excused himself, saying that he had a matter of
business to attend to, and left his guests to their own devices. The
house was divided into two apartments by curtains of caribou hides,
which were hung from one of the low crossbeams of the ceiling. At the
end of each room a fire burned on a roughly built hearth. Two small
windows of clouded glass partially lit the sombre interior. Books in
English, French, and Spanish, a packet of papers, ink and quills, and a
neatly executed drawing of a pinnace under sail lay on a table near one
of the windows. Antlers of stags, decorated quivers and bows, painted
hides, and glossy skins adorned the rough walls. Above the hearth in the
room in which Kingswell and his young companion sat, hung a musket with
a silver inlaid stock, a carved powder-horn, and several knives and
daggers in beaded sheaths. On the floor lay two great, pink-lipped West
Indian shells. A steel head-piece, a breastplate of the same sure metal,
and a heavy sword with a basket hilt hung above D'Antons' bed.

Kingswell looked over the books on the table. He found that one of them
was a manual of arms, written in the Spanish language; another a work of
navigation, by a Frenchman; a third a weighty thesis on the science and
practice of surgery; and the fourth was a volume as well-loved as
familiar,--Master William Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet." He took up
this last, and, seating himself with his shoulder to the window, was
soon far away from the failures and daily perils of the wilderness. The
greedy, hard-bitted materialist Present, with its quests of "fish," and
fur, and gold, was replaced by the magic All-Time of the playwright
poet.

Ouenwa wandered about the room, prying into every nook and corner, and
examining the shells, the arms, and the decorations. He even knelt on
the hearthstone, and, at the risk of setting fire to his hair, tried to
solve the mystery of the chimney--for a fire indoor unaccompanied by a
lodgeful of smoke was a new thing in his experience. He looked
frequently at Kingswell, in the hope of finding him open to questions,
but was always disappointed. At last the thought occurred to him that
it would be a fine thing to get hold of the great sword above the bed,
and make cut, lunge, and parry with it as Kingswell had shown him how to
do on several occasions. So he climbed on to the bed, and, in trying to
clear the sword from its peg, knocked the steel cap ringing to the
floor. Kingswell sprang from his stool, with his arm across his body and
his hand on his sword-hilt, and Master Shakespeare's immortal drama
sprawled at his feet. "Oh, that's all, is it?" he exclaimed, in tones of
relief. "But you must not handle other people's goods, lad," he added,
kindly, "especially a gentleman's arms and armour."

Ouenwa flushed and apologized, and was about to step from D'Antons'
couch to recover the head-piece, when D'Antons himself entered the
cabin. Kingswell turned to him and explained the accident.

"My young friend is very sorry," he said, "and would beg your pardon if
he felt less embarrassed. However, captain, I beg it for him. I was so
intent on the affairs of Romeo that I was not watching him. He is
naturally of an investigating turn of mind."

The Frenchman waved a slim hand and flashed his white teeth. "It is
nothing, nothing," he cried. "I beg you not to mention it again, or
give it another thought. The old pot has sustained many a shrewder whack
than a tumble on the floor. Ah, it has turned blades of Damascus before
now! But enough of this triviality! I have returned to request you to
come with me to our governor. Neither Trigget nor I have mentioned him
to you, as he is not desirous of meeting strangers. But he will make his
own apologies, Master Kingswell."

He stood aside, for Kingswell and Ouenwa to pass out before him.
Kingswell went first. As Ouenwa crossed the threshold, D'Antons nipped
him sharply by the arm, and hissed, "Dog! Cur!" in a voice so low, so
sinister, that the boy gasped. But in a breath the Frenchman was his
affable self again, and the Beothic, with the invectives still burning
his ears, almost believed that he had been the victim of some evil
magic. Kingswell caught nothing of the incident.

Ouenwa was requested to wait outside. Master Kingswell was ushered into
the governor's cabin, and D'Antons closed the door behind him. The young
Englishman found himself in a dimly lit apartment very similar to that
which he had just left. He hesitated, a step inside the threshold, and
narrowed his lids in an effort to see more clearly. The Frenchman paused
at his elbow. Two figures advanced from the farther side of the room.
He ventured another step, and bowed with all the grace at his command,
for one of the figures was that of a young woman in flashing raiment.
The other was of a slim, foppishly dressed man of a little past middle
age, with a worn face that somehow retained its air of youthfulness
despite its haggard lines and faded skin.

"Welcome to our humble retreat, Master Kingswell," said the gentleman,
extending his hand and laughing softly. "This is indeed an unlooked-for
pleasure. We last met, I believe, at Randon Hall--or was it at Beverly?"

"Sir Ralph Westleigh!" exclaimed Kingswell, in a voice of ill-concealed
consternation and surprise. For a moment he stood in an attitude of
half-recoil. For a moment he hesitated, staring at the other with wide
eyes. Then he caught the waiting hand in a firm grip.

"Thank you, Sir Ralph. Yes, it was at Beverly that we last met," he
said, evenly. He turned to the girl, who stood beside her father with
downcast eyes and flaming cheeks and throat. The baronet hastened to
make her known to the visitor.

"My daughter Beatrix," he said. "A good girl, who willingly and
cheerfully shares her worthless father's exile."

Mistress Westleigh extended a firm and shapely hand, and Kingswell,
bending low above it, intoxicated by the sudden presence of beauty and a
flood of homesick memories, pressed his lips to the slim fingers with a
warmth that startled the lady and brought a flash of anger to D'Antons'
eyes. He recovered himself in an instant. "To see you in this
wilderness--amid these bleak surroundings!" he exclaimed, scarcely above
a whisper. "I cannot realize it, Mistress Beatrix! And once we played at
racquets together in the court at Beverly."

The girl smiled at him, with a gleam of understanding in her dark,
parti-coloured eyes.

"I remember," she said. "You have not changed greatly, save in size."
And at that she laughed, with a note of embarrassment.

"But you have," replied Kingswell. "You were not very beautiful as a
little girl. To me you looked much the same as my own sisters."

For a second, or less, the maiden's eyes met his with merriment and
questioning in their depths. Then they were lowered. Sir Ralph moved
uneasily.

"Come, come," he said, "we must not stand here all day, like geese on a
village green. There are seats by the fire." He led the way. "Captain,
if you are not busy I hope you'll stay and hear some of Master
Kingswell's adventures," he added, turning to D'Antons.

"With pleasure," answered the captain.

"One moment, sir," said Kingswell to Sir Ralph Westleigh. "I have a
young friend--a sort of ward--whom I left outside. I'll tell him to run
over to the men and amuse himself with them."

As he opened the door and spoke a few kind words to Ouenwa, there was a
sneer on D'Antons' lips that did not escape Mistress Beatrix Westleigh.
It irritated her beyond measure, and she had all she could do to
restrain herself from slapping him--for hot blood and a fighting spirit
dwelt in that fair body. She wondered how she had once considered him
attractive. She blushed crimson at the thought.

Kingswell returned and seated himself on a stool between the governor of
the little colony and the maiden. First of all, he told them who Ouenwa
was, and of the time the lad saved him from injury by flooring old
Trowley with his canoe paddle. Then he briefly sketched the voyage of
the _Pelican_, and told something of his interests in the fishing fleet
and in the new land.

"And you found no indications of gold?" queried D'Antons.

"None," replied the voyager, "but some splendid copper ore in great
quantities, and one mine of 'fool's gold.'"

The baronet nodded, with one of his wan smiles. "There are other kinds
of fool's gold than these iron pyrites, I believe," he said, "and one
finds it nearer home than in this God-forsaken--ah--in this wild
country."

The others understood the reference, and even the polished Frenchman
looked into the fire and had nothing to say. Kingswell studied the
water-bleached toes of his boots, and Beatrix glanced piteously at her
father. For Sir Ralph Westleigh's life had known much of fool's gold,
and much of many another folly, and something of that to which his
acquaintances in Somerset--and, for that matter, in all England--gave a
stronger and less lenient name. The baronet had lived hard; but his
story comes later.

"I knew nothing of this plantation of yours," said Kingswell, presently.
"I did not know, even, that you were interested in colonization--and yet
you have been here a matter of two years, so Trigget tells me."

"Yes, and likely to die here--unless I am unearthed," replied Sir Ralph,
bitterly, and with a meaning glance at Kingswell. "I put entire faith in
my friends," he added. "And they are all in this little fort on Gray
Goose River. My undoing lies in their hands."

"Sir Ralph," replied Kingswell, uneasily but stoutly, "I hope your trust
has been extended to me,--yes, and to my men. Your wishes in any matter
of--of silence or the like--are our orders. My fellows are true as
steel. My friends are theirs. The young Beothic would risk his life for
you at a word from me."

The baronet was visibly affected by this speech. He laid a hand on the
young man's knee and peered into his face.

"Then you are a friend--out and out?" he inquired.

"To the death," said the other, huskily.

"And you have heard? Of course you have heard!"

"Yes."

"It is not for me to say 'God bless you' to any man," said Sir Ralph,
"but it's good of you. I feel your kindness more deeply than I can say.
I have forgotten my old trick of making pretty speeches."

Kingswell blushed uncomfortably and wished that D'Antons, with his
polite, superior, inscrutable smile, was a thousand miles out of sight
of his embarrassment. The girl leaned toward him. But she did not look
at him. "God bless you--my fellow countryman," she whispered, in a voice
so low that he alone caught the words. He had no answer to make to that
unexpected reward. For a little they maintained a painful silence. It
was broken by the Frenchman.

"You understand, Master Kingswell, that, for certain reasons, it is
advisable that the place of Sir Ralph Westleigh's retreat be kept from
the knowledge of every one save ourselves," he said, slowly and easily.

"I understand," replied Kingswell, shortly. Captain d'Antons jarred on
him, despite all his faultless and affable manners.




CHAPTER XI.

THE SETTING-IN OF WINTER


About mid-afternoon of the day of Kingswell's advent into the settlement
on Gray Goose River--Fort Beatrix it was called--the sky clouded, the
voice of the river thinned and saddened, and snow began to fall. By
Trigget's advice--and Trigget seemed to be the working head of the
plantation--the pelts and gear of the _Pelican_ were removed to the
storehouse.

"Ye must winter in Newfoundland, sir, however the idea affects your
plans, for no more ships will be sailing home this season; and ye
couldn't make it in your bully," said the hospitable skipper.

"We might work 'round to St. John's," replied Kingswell.

Trigget shook his head. "This be the safer place o' the two," he
answered, "and your Honour's company here will help keep Sir Ralph out
o' his black moods. He wants ye to stay, I know. There'll be work and to
spare for your men, what with cuttin' fuel, and huntin' game, and
boat-buildin'."

So Kingswell decided that, if this should prove the real setting-in of
winter, and if no objections were raised by any of the pioneers, he
would share the colony's fortunes until the following spring. D'Antons
expressed himself as charmed with the decision; but, for all that,
Kingswell saw, by deeper and finer signs than most people would credit
him with the ability to read, that his presence was really far from
agreeable to the French adventurer.

When night closed about the little settlement, the snow was still
falling, and ground and roofs shone with bleak radiance through the veil
of darkness. The flakes of the storm were small and dry, and unstirred
by any wind. They wove a curtain of silence over the unprotesting
wilderness.

Kingswell and Ouenwa supped with the Westleighs. But before the meal,
and before Mistress Beatrix appeared from her little chamber, the two
gentlemen had an hour of private conversation.

"This Captain d'Antons--what of him?" inquired Kingswell.

"He is none of our choosing," replied the baronet. "Several years ago,
before I had quite given up the old life and the old show, I met him in
London. He was reported rich. He had sailed many voyages to the West
Indies, and talked of lands granted to him in New France. I had sold
Beverly, and Beatrix was with me in town. She was little more than a
child, but her looks attracted a deal of attention. She had nothing
else, as all the town knew, with her father a ruined gamester, and her
dead mother's property gone, with Randon Hall and Beverly! Dear God, but
here was a dower for a beautiful lass! Well, the poets made a song or
two, and three old men were for paying titles and places for her little
hand--and then the end came. We won back to Somerset, spur and whip,
lashed along by fear. We hid about, in this cottage and that, while my
trusted friend Trigget provisioned his little craft and got together all
the folk whom you see here, save D'Antons. After a rough and tiring
voyage of three weeks' duration, and just when we were looking out for
land, we were met by a French frigate, and forced to haul our wind. A
boat-load of armed men left the pirate--yes, that's what she was, a damn
pirate--and there was Captain d'Antons seated in the stern-sheets of
her, beside the mate. He had not been as long at sea as we had, and he
knew all about my trouble, curse him! He left the frigate, which he said
was bound on a peaceful voyage of discovery to the West Indies, and
joined our expedition. I could not forbid it. I was at his mercy, with
his cutthroats alongside and the gallows at the back of it. He has hung
to us ever since; and he has acted civil enough, damn him. If he'd show
his hoof now and again, I'd like it better--for then we would all be on
our guard."

"But why does he stay? Why does he live in this place when he might be
reaping the harvests common to such husbandmen?" inquired Kingswell.
"Has he a stake in the colony?"

The baronet gazed reflectively at the young man. "The fellow has kept my
secret, and shared our rough lot and dreary exile, and even expended
some money on provisions," he replied, deliberately, "for no other
reason than that he is in love with my daughter."

"He! A buccaneer!" exclaimed Kingswell, warmly.

"Even so," answered the baronet. "There, on the high seas, when he had
us all in his clutch, when he might have seized by force that for which
he now sues, he accepted my word of honour--mark you, he accepted what I
had scarce the face to offer--that I would not withstand his suit, nor
allow my men to do him any treasonable hurt so long as he kept my
hiding-place secret and behaved like a gentleman."

"And Mistress Beatrix?" asked the young man, softly.

"Ah, who can say?" responded the broken baronet. "At one time I feared
that he was appearing as a hero to her. But I do not know. He played his
game cleverly at first, but now he is losing patience. I would to God
that he would lose it altogether. Then the compact would be broken. But
no, he is cautious. He knows that, at a word from the girl, my sword
would be out. Then things would go hard with him, even though he should
kill me, for my men hate him."

"Why not pick a quarrel with him?" asked the headstrong Kingswell.

"You do not understand--you cannot understand--how delicate a thing to
keep is the word of honour of a man who is branded as being without
honour," replied the other, sadly.

"And should Mistress Beatrix flout him," said Kingswell, "he would find
his revenge in reporting your whereabouts to the garrison at St.
John's."

"He is well watched," said Sir Ralph, "and this is not an easy place to
escape from, even in summer. We are hidden, up here, and not so much as
a fishing-ship has sighted us in the two years."

"I'll wager that he'd find a way past your vigilance if he set his mind
to it," retorted Kingswell. "Gad, but it maddens me to think of being
billeted under the roof of such an aspiring rogue! Rip me, but it's a
monstrous sin that a lady should be plagued, and a whole body of
Englishmen menaced, by a buccaneering adventurer."

"My boy," replied Sir Ralph, wearily, "you must curb your indignation,
even as the rest of us do. Discretion is the card to play just now. I
have been holding the game with it for over two years. Who knows but
that Time may shuffle the pack before long?"

Just then Mistress Beatrix joined them. She wore one of the gay
gowns--in truth somewhat enlarged and remodelled--by which her girlish
beauty had been abetted and set off in England. There seemed a
brightness and shimmer all about her. The coils of her dark hair were
bright. The changing eyes were bright. The lips, the round neck and
dainty throat, the buckled shoes, and even the material of bodice and
skirt were radiant in the gloom and firelight of that rough chamber. To
all appearances, her mood was as bright as her beauty. Sir Ralph watched
her with adoring eyes, realizing her bravery. Kingswell joined in her
gay chatter, and found it easy to be merry. Ouenwa, silent on the corner
of the bench by the hearth, gazed at this vision of loveliness with
wide eyes. He could realize, without effort, that Sir Ralph and D'Antons
and even his glorious Kingswell were men, even as Tom Bent, and the
Triggets, and Black Feather were, but that Mistress Beatrix was a
woman--a woman, as were William Trigget's wife and daughter, and Black
Feather's squaw--no, he could not believe it! He was even surprised to
note a resemblance to other females in the number of her hands and feet.
She had, most assuredly, two hands and two feet. Also she had one head.
But how different in quality, though similar in number, were the members
of this flashing young divinity.

"I left Montaw's lodge to behold the wonders of the world," mused the
dazzled child of the wilderness, "and already, without crossing the
great salt water, I have found the surpassing wonder. Can it be that any
more such beings exist? Has even Master Kingswell ever before looked
upon such beauty and such raiment?"

His spellbound gaze was met by the eyes of the enchantress. To his
amazement, the lady moved from her father's side and seated herself on
the bench.

"You are so quiet," she said, "that I did not notice you before. So you
are Master Kingswell's ward?"

Her voice was very kind and cheerful, and her silks brushed the lad's
hand. He looked at the finery uneasily, but did not answer her question.

"You told us he knew English," she said to Kingswell.

"He does," replied the young man. Then, to the boy: "Ouenwa, Mistress
Westleigh wants to know if you are my friend."

"Yes," said the lad. "Good friend."

"And my friend, too?" asked the girl.

"Yes," replied Ouenwa. "You look so--so--like he called the sky one
morning." He pointed at Master Kingswell.

"What was that?" she queried.

"What morning?" asked Kingswell, leaning forward and smiling.

"Five mornings ago, chief," replied Ouenwa.

Kingswell laughed. "You are right, lad," he said.

"But tell me what you called the sky, sir. Really, this is very
provoking. No doubt the boy thinks I look a fright," said Miss
Westleigh.

"Beatrix," interrupted Sir Ralph, "surely I see Kate with the candles."

The girl could not deny it, for the table was spread in the same
room,--a rough, square table with a damask cloth, and laid out with a
fair show of silver, decanters, and a great venison pasty, which had
been cooked in the Triggets' kitchen across the yard.

The meal was a delightful one to Kingswell. He had not eaten off china
dishes for many months. The food, though plain, was well cooked and well
served. The wines were as nectar to his eager palate. And over it all
was the magic of Mistress Westleigh's presence--potent magic enough to a
young gentleman who had almost forgotten the looks and ways of the women
of his own kind. Ouenwa sat as one in a dream, fairly stupefied by the
gleam of silver and linen under the soft light of the candles. He ate
painfully and slowly, imitating Kingswell. He looked often at the
vivacious hostess. Suddenly he exclaimed: "I remember. Yes, it was
lovely beautiful, what the chief said!" Kingswell laughed delightedly,
and the baronet joined, with reserve, in the mirth. The girl looked
puzzled for a moment,--then confused,--then, with a little,
indescribable cry of merriment, she patted Ouenwa's shoulder.

"Charming lad!" she exclaimed. "I have not received so pretty a
compliment for, oh, ever so long." She looked across the table at
Kingswell, feeling his gaze upon her. His eyes were very grave, and
darkened with thought, though his lips were still smiling.




CHAPTER XII.

MEDITATION AND ACTION


For hours after retiring Kingswell lay awake, reviewing, in his restless
brain, the incidents of that crowded day. His couch was luxurious,
compared to the resting-places he had known since leaving the _Heart of
the West_; but, for all that, sleep evaded him. From the other side of
the hearth Ouenwa's deep and regular breathing reached his alert ears.
He saw the yellow light blink to darkness above the curtain of skins,
when D'Antons extinguished his candle in the other apartment. The red
firelight rose and fell, dwindled and flooded high. The core of it
contracted and expanded, and a straight log across the middle of the
glow was like a heavy eyelid. It was like something alive--like
something stirring between sleeping and waking, desiring sleep, yet
afraid to forsake a vigil. To the restless explorer beside the hearth it
suggested a drowsy servitor nodding and starting in a deserted hall.
"What is it waiting for?" he wondered, and smiled at the conceit. "What
does it fear? Mayhap the master and mistress are late at a rout, and are
people without consideration for the feelings of their servants."

From such harmless imagery his mind slipped to the less pleasant subject
of Sir Ralph Westleigh. He recalled what he had seen and heard of the
days of the baronet's glory--of the great places near Bristol, with
their stables that were the envy of dukes, and their routs that lured
people weary and dangerous journeys--of the famous Lady Westleigh and
her jewels--of Sir Ralph's kindliness to great and small alike. His own
father, the merchant-knight of Bristol, had held the baronet in high
esteem. Bernard himself, when a child, and later when a well-grown lad,
had experienced the hospitality of Randon Hall and Beverly. At the time
of his last visit to Beverly, rumour was busy with the baronet's
affairs. During Lady Westleigh's life, all had gone well, apparently.
After her death, Sir Ralph spent less of his time at home, and more of
it in distant London, and even in Paris. Stories went abroad of his
heavy gaming and his ruinous bad luck. People said the love of the dice
and the cards had settled in the man like a disease, working on him
physically to such an extent that he looked a different person when the
heat of the play was on him. Also it played the devil with him
morally--and perhaps mentally. So things took the turn and started
down-hill. Then the run was short and mad, despite warnings of friends,
threats of relatives, and the baronet's own numerous clever checks and
parries to avoid disaster. There was a season of hope after the sale of
Randon. But the lurid clouds gathered again. Then Beverly was
impoverished to the last oak and the last horse in the stud. The baronet
took his daughter to town, and, by a turn of luck, put in a few merry
months. Then a certain Scotch viscount caught him playing as no
gentleman, no matter how dissolute, is supposed to play. The Scotchman
made a clamour, and was killed for his trouble. That was the last known
of Sir Ralph Westleigh and his daughter by any one of the outside world
until the _Pelican_ landed her voyagers before the stockade of Fort
Beatrix on Gray Goose River.

All these matters employed Kingswell's thoughts as he lay awake in
Captain d'Antons' cabin and watched the fire on the rough hearth fall
lower and lower. Pity for the young girl, who had been born and bred to
such a different heritage, pained and fretted him more keenly than a
personal loss. The discomfort of it was almost as if his conscience were
accusing him of disloyalty to a friend, though that was absurd, as
neither he nor his had helped Westleigh in his descent, nor cried out
against him when he met disaster at the bottom. But he had never, during
those two years after their disappearance, given them more than a
passing thought--and they had been friends and neighbours. He had
experienced no pity for the young and beautiful girl with whom he had
played in the racquet court at Beverly. Like the great world of which he
was so insignificant a part, he had forgotten. Two lives, more or less,
were of no consequence in such stirring times. He groaned, as if the
realization of a great sin had come to him. Then, to the anger against
himself was added anger against the world that had dragged Sir Ralph
into this oblivion of dishonour, and the innocent girl into exile. What
had she done to be driven beyond the bounds of civilization, her safety
dependent on the whims of a French buccaneer? Ah, there was the raw
spot, sure enough! In the little space of time between two risings of
the sun, Kingswell had met a man and marked him for an enemy. Nursing a
bitter, though somewhat muddled, resentment, he at last fell asleep,
guarded from storm and frost by the roof of the very man who had
inspired his anger.

For the next few days matters went smoothly at Fort Beatrix. It was
evident to even the least experienced of the settlers that the winter
had come to stay. The snow lay deep and dry over the frozen earth. The
river was already hidden under a skin of gleaming ice, made opaque by
the snow that had mingled with the water while it was freezing. The
little settlement took up the routine of the dreary months. Axes were
sharpened at the great stone in the well-house. The men donned moccasins
of deerskin. They tied ingenious racquets, or snow-shoes, to their feet
and tramped into the sombre forests. All day the thud, thud of the axes
jarred across the air, interrupted ever and anon by the rending,
splitting lament of some falling tree.

Kingswell put his men under William Trigget's orders, and he and Ouenwa
spent much of their time with the choppers. Also, they journeyed with
the trappers. Captain d'Antons, who was a skilled and tireless woodsman,
led them on many weary marches in quest of game and fur. Most of the
caribou had travelled southward, in herds of from ten to one hundred
head, at the approach of winter; but a few remained in the sheltered
valleys. Fortunately the settlers were familiar with the habits of the
deer, and had laid in a supply of dried venison during the summer.
However, whenever the hunters managed to make a kill, the fresh meat
was enthusiastically received at the fort. Hares and grouse were snared,
as were foxes and other small animals. A few wolves and one or two
wildcats were shot. The bears were all tucked safely away in their
winter quarters, and the beavers were frozen into theirs. On the whole,
the hunters had a hard time of it, and no great reward for their toil.
But it was work that kept both their brains and sinews employed, and so
was of a deal more worth than the bare value of the pelts and dinners it
supplied.

One day in early December, when Kingswell, D'Antons, the younger
Donnelly, and Ouenwa were traversing a drifted expanse of "barren,"
marching in single file and without undue noise, they came upon another
trail of racquet prints. They halted. They regarded this unexpected
evidence of the proximity of their fellow man with misgivings--for snow
had fallen in abundance, and therefore the trail was new. They glanced
uneasily about them, scanning clumps of spruce and fir and mounds of
snow-drifted rock with anxious eyes. They strained their ears for some
warning sound--or for the twanging of bowstrings. They saw nothing. They
heard nothing but the disconsolate chirping of a moose-bird in a
thicket close at hand. D'Antons lowered his gaze to the trail.

"From the westward, and heading for the river," he said. "Then they are
not from the village on Gander Lake."

"Big number," remarked Ouenwa. "Ten, twenty, thirty--don't know how
much! Whole camp, I think."

"Ay," agreed Donnelly, "they sure has packed clear down through two
falls o' snow. Ye could trot a pony along the pat' they has made."

"Are you on friendly terms with the savages?" inquired Kingswell of
Captain d'Antons. The Frenchman smiled uncheerfully and shrugged his
lean shoulders. He was not one to speak unconsidered words.

"Yes, we are on friendly terms with the people from Gander Lake," he
replied, presently. "That is, we have traded with them a number of
times, and have exchanged gifts with their chief, and through him with
old Soft Hand. But Soft Hand is dead now; and these fellows are
evidently from the West. Also, friendship means nothing where these
vermin are concerned. Treachery is as the breath of life to them."

"Panounia," whispered Ouenwa, excitedly. "Panounia no good for friend.
He is a murderer. He is a false chief. He make trade--yes, with
war-arrows from the bushes and with knives in the dark. In friendship
his hand is under his robe, and his fingers are on the hilt of his
knife. Evil warms itself at his heart like an old witch at a fire."

D'Antons smiled thinly at the lad. "There is a time for all things," he
said--"a time for oratory and another time for action. If you are
willing, Master Kingswell, let us now retrace our steps as swiftly and
quietly as may be. It would be wise to warn the fort that a band of the
sly devils is abroad."

Ouenwa glanced uncertainly at the speaker and flushed darkly. Kingswell
intimated his willingness to return immediately to Fort Beatrix by a
curt nod. It was in his heart to administer a kick to Captain Pierre
d'Antons, though just why the desire he could not say. They turned in
their tracks and started back along the twisting, seven-mile trail.
D'Antons led; and the pace he set was a stiff one. Mile after mile was
passed, with no other sound save those of padding racquet and toiling
breath. In the hollows their shoulders brushed the snow from the
crowding spruce-fronds. Going over the knolls, they crouched low, and
scanned the horizon with alert eyes as they ran.

At last, all but breathless from the prolonged exertion, the hunters
turned aside from the path and ascended the gradual, heavily wooded side
of a hill which overlooked the fort from the south. They crossed the
naked summit with painful caution, bending double, and taking every
advantage of the sheltering thickets.

"The choppers are inside," whispered D'Antons to Kingswell, as they
peered furtively out between the snow-weighted branches. "See! And the
savages are in cover along the river." It was quite evident to Kingswell
that the place had been attacked, and was now in a state of siege. The
platform in the southeast corner of the stockade was protected by
shields composed of bundles of firewood. Men whom he recognized as those
who had been working in the woods earlier in the day moved about within
the enclosure. The wide, snow-covered clearing that had been so spotless
when he had last seen it was trampled and stained here and there by dark
patches. Along the fringe of timber that shut the river from the
clearing, and extended to within a dozen paces of the southeast corner
of the stockade, a Beothic warrior would frequently show himself for a
moment, hoot derisively, and let fly a harmless shaft. Presently the
watchers on the knoll saw the head and shoulders of William Trigget
above the shield of the gun-platform. The master mariner shaded his eyes
with his hand and seemed to be scanning the woods along the river and
then the timber in which his own comrades were concealed. He lowered his
hand and ducked quickly--and not a second too soon; for a flight of
arrows rattled against his stronghold, a few stuck, quivering, into the
pickets of the stockade, and many fell within the fort.

Kingswell turned to D'Antons. "More of them than we thought," he said.
"There must have been a hundred arrows in that volley."

Captain d'Antons nodded with a preoccupied air. He did not look at his
companion, and his brow was puckered in lines of thought. If the
Englishman had been able to read the other's mind at that moment, a deal
of future trouble would have been spared him. However, as Kingswell was
but an adventurous, keen-witted young man, with no superhuman powers, he
was content with the Frenchman's nod, and returned his attentions to the
fort.

Suddenly, from the screen of faggots above which Trigget had so lately
exposed his head, burst a flash of yellow flame, a spurt of white smoke,
and a clapping bulk of sound. The stockade shook. A spruce-tree shook in
the wood by the river, and cries of fear and consternation rang across
the frosty air. A score of savages darted from their cover and as
quickly sped back again. Flight after flight of arrows broke away and
tested every inch of surface of Trigget's shelter. Then, with shrill
screams and mad yells of defiance, the whole party of Beothics emerged
into the clearing and dashed for the palisade. They drew their bows as
they ran, and some hurled clubs and spears. In front, with red feathers
in his hair and his right arm bandaged across his breast, Panounia
shouted encouragement and led the charge. They were half-way across the
open when the second cannon spat forth its message of hate. The ball
passed low over the advancing mass and plunged into the timber beyond.
For a second or two, the attackers wavered, a few turned back, then they
continued their valorous onset. They were already springing at the
palisade when the muskets crashed in their faces from half a dozen
loopholes. This volley was followed immediately by another. The savages
dropped back from their futile leapings against the fortification, hung
on their heels for a moment, clamorous and undecided, and then broke for
cover. They dragged their dead and wounded with them, and left
sanguinary trails on the snow. They were within a few yards of the
sheltering trees when one of the little cannon banged again. The ball
cut across the mass of crowded warriors like a string through cheese.

"Now is our time!" exclaimed Kingswell. "Run for the gate, lads."




CHAPTER XIII.

SIGNS OF A DIVIDED HOUSE


The returning hunters were promptly admitted to the fort. The little
garrison welcomed them joyfully. The West Country sailors were, for the
moment, cordial even toward D'Antons, whom they usually ignored. The
party had taken a hundred chances with death in the crossing of the
narrow clearing. Arrows had followed them from the fringe of wood along
the river, like bees from an overturned hive. Ouenwa's left arm had been
scratched. D'Antons' fur cap had been torn from his head, pierced
through and through. A hail of missiles had clattered against the gate
as the good timbers swung to behind them. Cries of rage and chagrin, in
which Ouenwa's name was repeated many times, rang from the retreat of
the defeated warriors. The garrison answered with cheers. Ouenwa's
shrill voice carried clear above the tumult, lifted in Beothic insults.

Sir Ralph himself was in command of the imperilled fortress. The
excitement had stirred him out of his customary gloom. His eyes were
bright, and his cheeks flew a patch of colour. His sword was at his
side, and he held a musket in his hand.

"That was their third attempt to get over the stockade," he said to
Kingswell and D'Antons. "They are filled with the very devil to-day. But
I scarcely think that they will come back for more, now that Trigget has
got his growlers into working order."

"How did it begin?" asked the Frenchman.

"Why, about three score of them marched up and said they wanted to come
in and trade," replied the baronet, "but, as they seemed to have nothing
to trade save their bows and spears, Trigget warned them off. Then they
went out on the river and began chopping up the _Red Rose_ and the
_Pelican_. At that we let off a musket, and they retired to cover, from
which they soon emerged with reinforcements and tried to carry the place
by weight of numbers."

"Hark," said the Frenchman. "What is that they are yelling?"

"My name," replied Ouenwa. "They are my enemies."

"Ah, and so it is our privilege to fight this gentleman's battles for
him," remarked D'Antons, with an exaggerated bow to the lad. "Perhaps
this is the explanation of the attack."

"I think not," answered Kingswell, crisply. "They are surprised at
discovering him here. Also they are surprised and displeased at seeing
me again. They have smelled our powder before, as you have heard, I
think."

"Yes, I have heard the heroic tale, monsieur," replied the captain,
smiling his thin, one-sided, Continental smile.

The blood mounted in Kingswell's cheek. He turned on his heel without
any further words. Ouenwa followed him to the Trigget cabin, whence he
was bound for something to eat.

Panounia and his braves retreated across the frozen river, and did not
show themselves again that day. In the fort every musket was loaded, the
improvised gun-shields were repaired and strengthened, and the guns were
again got ready for action. In place of round shot, William Trigget
charged them with scrap-iron and slugs of lead.

"When ye has a lot o' mowin' to do in a short time, cut a wide swath,"
he remarked to Tom Bent.

"Ay, sir," replied Kingswell's boatswain, turning a hawk-like eye on the
dark edges of the forest. "Ay, sir, cut a wide swath, an' let the devil
make the hay. It be mun's own crop."

At the time of the hunters' return, Mistress Beatrix was looking from
the doorway of her father's cabin. Now she knelt in her own chamber,
sobbing quietly, with her face buried in her hands. All the bitterness
and insecurity of her position had come to her with overmastering force.
The sight of Captain d'Antons' thin face and uncovered, bedraggled hair,
as he leaned on his musket and talked with her father and the young
Englishman, had melted the courage in her heart. She prayed confusedly,
half her thoughts with the petitions which she made to her God, and half
with the desperate state of her affairs and the features and attitude of
the buccaneer.

She was disturbed by some one entering the outer room. She recognized
the footsteps as those of Sir Ralph. She got up from her knees, bathed
her face and eyes, touched her hair to order with skilful fingers, and
opened the door of her chamber. The baronet looked up at the sound.

"Ah, lass," he said, "we've driven the rascals off. They have crossed
the river."

With that he fell again to his slow pacing of the room.

"I do not fear the savages," she cried. "Oh, I do think their knives and
arrows would be welcome."

"Poor child! poor little lass!" he said, pausing beside her and kissing
her tenderly. "You have been weeping," he added, concernedly. "But
courage, dear. The fellow is harmless for five long months to come. His
fangs are as good as filed, shut off here and surrounded by the snow and
the savages."

Evidently the sight of his daughter's distress had dimmed the finer
conception of his promise to D'Antons. He looked about him uneasily and
sighed.

She laid her face against his coat and held tight to his sleeves.

"I hate him," she whispered. "Oh, my father, I hate him for my own sake
as much as I fear him for yours. His every covert glance, his every open
attention, stings me like a whip. And yet, out of fear, I must smile and
simper, and play the hypocrite."

"No--by God!" exclaimed Westleigh, trembling with emotion. Then, more
quietly, "Beatrix, I cannot wear this mask any longer. The fellow is
hateful to me. I despise him. How such a creation of the devil's can
love you so unswervingly is more than I can fathom. I would rather see
you dead than married to him. There--I have broken my word again! Let me
go."

He freed himself from the girl's hands, caught up his hat and cloak,
and left the cabin. He crossed over to the well-house, where some of the
men were grinding axes and cutlasses, and joined feverishly in their
simple talk of work, and battle, and adventure. Their honest faces and
homely language drove a little of the bitterness of his shame from him.
Presently Kingswell and Ouenwa joined the group about the complaining
grindstone.

"Come," said Sir Ralph, "and look at the cannon."

He plucked Kingswell by the sleeve. Ouenwa followed them. All three
ascended the little platform on which the guns were mounted, by way of a
short ladder. The pieces, ready loaded, were snugly covered with
tarpaulins that could be snatched off in a turn of the hand.

"A worthy fellow is William Trigget," remarked the baronet. "Ay, he is
true as steel."

He laid a caressing hand on the breech of one of the little cannon. "I
would trust him, yea, and his good fellows, with anything I possess," he
said, "as readily as I trust these growlers to his care."

Just then Ouenwa pointed northward to the wooded bluff that cut into the
white valley and hid the settlement from the lower reaches of the river.
From beyond the point, moving slowly and unsteadily, appeared a
solitary human figure. Its course lay well out on the level floor of the
stream, and the forest growth along the shore did not conceal it from
the watchers. It approached uncertainly, as if without a definite goal,
and, when within a few hundred yards of the fort, staggered and fell
prone.

"What the devil does it mean?" cried Sir Ralph.

Kingswell shook his head, and questioned Ouenwa. The lad continued to
gaze out across the open. The sun was low over the western hills, and
its light was red on the snow.

"Hurt," he said, presently. "Maybe starved. He is not of Panounia's
band."

"How do you know that, lad?" asked the baronet.

"I know," replied the boy. "He is a hunter. He is not of the war-party.
He is from the salt water."

"He is usually right when he maintains that a thing is so, without being
able to give a reason for it," said Kingswell, quietly. "And, if he is,
it seems a pity to let the man die out there under our very eyes."

"God knows I do not want any one to suffer," said the baronet, "but may
it not be a trick of this Panounia's, or whatever you call him?"

"No trick," replied Ouenwa; and, without so much as "by your leave," he
vaulted over the breastwork of faggots and landed lightly on the snow
outside the stockade. Without a moment's hesitation, Kingswell followed.
Together they started toward the still figure out on the river, at a
brisk run. They had reached the bank before Sir Ralph recovered from his
astonishment. He quickly descended to the square, and, without
attracting any attention, informed William Trigget of what had happened.
Trigget and his son immediately ascended to the guns and drew off their
tarpaulins. "We'll cover the retreat, sir," said the mariner. They saw
their reckless comrades bend over the prostrate stranger. Then Kingswell
lifted the apparently lifeless body and started back at a jog trot.
Ouenwa lagged behind, with his head continually over his shoulder. The
elder Trigget swore a great oath, and smacked a knotty fist into a
leathern palm.

"Them's well-plucked uns," he added.

The baronet and John Trigget agreed silently. They were too intent on
the approach of the rescuers to speak. Also, they kept a keen outlook
along the woods on the farther shore. But the enemy made no sign; and
Kingswell, Ouenwa, and the unconscious stranger reached the stockade in
safety. The stranger proved to be none other than Black Feather, the
stalwart and kindly brave who had built his lodge beside the old
arrow-maker's, above Wigwam Harbour, in the days of peace. He was
carried into Trigget's cabin and dosed with French brandy until he
opened his eyes. He looked about him blankly for a second or two, and
then his lids fluttered down again. He had not recognized either
Kingswell or Ouenwa.

"Oh, the poor lad, the poor lad," cried Dame Trigget. "Whatever has mun
been a-doin' now, to get so distressin' scrawny? An' a fine figger, too,
though he be a heathen, without a manner o' doubt."

"Never mind his religious beliefs, dame, but get some of your good
venison broth inside of him," said Master Kingswell. "That's a treatment
that would surely convert any number of heathen."

While they were clustered about Black Feather's couch, D'Antons entered.
He peered over Dame Trigget's ample shoulders and looked considerably
surprised at finding an unconscious, emaciated Beothic the centre of
attraction.

"What's this?" he asked. "A tragedy or a comedy?"

His tone was sour, and too bantering for the occasion.

The baronet turned on him with an expression of mouth and eye that did
not pass unnoticed by the little group.

"Certainly not a comedy, monsieur," he replied, coldly; "and we hope it
will not prove a tragedy."




CHAPTER XIV.

A TRICK OF PLAY-ACTING


Meals were not served in Captain d'Antons' cabin. The little settlement
possessed but one servant among all its workers, and that one was Maggie
Stone, Mistress Westleigh's old nurse. The care of Sir Ralph's
establishment was all she could attend to. So the men who had no
women-folk of their own to cook for them were fed by Dame Trigget and
her sturdy daughter Joyce, or by the Donnelly women. Kingswell and
D'Antons took their meals at Dame Trigget's table, and were served by
themselves, with every mark of respect. Ouenwa, Tom Bent, Harding, and
Clotworthy shared the Donnellys' board.

A few hours after Black Feather's rescue, Kingswell and D'Antons sat
opposite one another at a small table near the hearth of the Triggets'
living-room. A stew of venison and a bottle of French wine stood between
them. D'Antons took up the bottle, and made as if to fill the other's
glass.

"One moment," said Kingswell, raising his hand.

The Frenchman looked at him keenly and set down the vintage. The
Englishman leaned forward.

"Captain d'Antons," he said, scarce above a whisper, "a remark that you
made to-day seemed to imply that you considered me a braggart. Your
remark was in reference to the brushes between the _Pelican_ and a party
of natives during our cruise from the North. Before I take wine with you
to-night, I want you to either withdraw or explain your implication."

While Kingswell spoke, the other's eyes flashed and calmed again. Now
his dark face wore an even look of puzzled inquiry. His fine eyes, clear
now of the expression of cynicism which so often marred them, held the
Englishman's without any sign of either embarrassment or anger. His hand
returned to the neck of the bottle and lingered there. Lord, but the
drama lost an exceptionally fine interpreter when the high seas claimed
Pierre d'Antons! The thin, clean-shaven lips trembled--or was it the
wavering of the candle-light?

"My friend," he said, softly, "how unfortunate am I in my stupidity--in
my blundering use of the English language. Whatever my words were, when
I spoke of having already heard of your fights with the savages, my
meaning was such that no one would take exception to. Did I use the word
heroic, monsieur? Then heroic, noble, was what I meant. An Englishman
would have made use of a smaller, a simpler word, perhaps; or would have
refrained from any display of admiration. Ah, I am unfortunate in my
heritage of French and Spanish blood--the blood that is outspoken both
for praise and blame."

Poor, honest Kingswell was shaken with conflicting emotions. His heart
told him the man was lying. His eyes assured him that he had been
grievously mistaken, not only in the matter of the remark concerning the
skirmishes with the Beothics, but in his whole opinion of the Frenchman.
His blood surged to his head, and whispered that he was a young fool to
be hoodwinked so easily. His brain was sadly uncertain. A twinge of pity
for the handsome adventurer--for the love-struck buccaneer--went through
him. But it faded at remembrance of Sir Ralph's story. He knew the
fellow was playing with him.

"Wine, monsieur?" inquired D'Antons, softly, with a smile of infinite
sweetness and shy persuasion.

With a mumbled apology, the young Englishman pushed forward his glass,
and the red wine swam to the brim. And all the while he was inwardly
cursing his own weakness and the other's strength. He had not the
courage to meet the Frenchman's look when they raised their glasses and
clinked them across the table. Lord, what a calf he was!

Had he no will of his own? Did he possess neither knowledge of men nor
mother wit? Ah, but he rated himself pitilessly as he bent his flushed
face over his plate of stew.

When the meal was finished, Kingswell returned to Black Feather's couch,
and D'Antons went over to his own cabin. By this time Black Feather had
recovered consciousness and swallowed some of Dame Trigget's broth;
also, he had recognized Ouenwa and murmured a few words to the lad in
his own tongue. But, beyond that, he was too weak to disclose anything
of what had happened in Wigwam Harbour after the slaying of Soft Hand.
He lay very still, apparently lifeless, except for his quick, bright
eyes, which moved restlessly in questioning scrutiny of the strange
women and bearded men who sat about the room. Ouenwa held one of the
transparent hands and smiled assuringly.

For half an hour Kingswell sat beside the man he had rescued so
courageously from death by starvation. Then, feeling the heat of the
room and the confusion of his thoughts too much to entertain calmly, he
went out into the cold and darkness and paced up and down. All
unknowing, he kicked the snow viciously every step. He was still in a
perturbed state of mind and temper when William Trigget approached him
through the gloom and touched his elbow.

"Askin' your pardon, master," he said, standing close, "but what of that
Injun in there? Be he really sick, or be he playing a game?"

"He is surely sick, and he is just as surely not playing a game,"
replied Kingswell. "But why do you ask? The fellow is a friend of
Ouenwa's, and was one of old Soft Hand's warriors."

"Ay, sir, but maybe mun has changed his coat," said Trigget, "an' has
shammed sick just to get carried inside the fort. There be something
goin' on outside, for certain."

"What?" asked the other.

Then Trigget told how he had been startled, while standing under the
gun-platform, by a sound of scrambling outside the stockade. He had
crawled noiselessly up the ladder and looked over the breastworks about
the guns. He had been able to distinguish something darker than the
surrounding darkness crouched against the palisade under him. The thing
had moved cautiously. He had detached a faggot from one of the bundles
beside him, for lack of a better weapon, and had hurled it down at the
black form. There had sounded a stifled cry, and the thing had vanished
in the night.

"It were one o' they savages, I know," concluded Trigget.

Kingswell forgot his personal grievance in the face of this menace from
the hidden enemy.

"The guards should be doubled," he said. "But come, we must let Sir
Ralph know of it."

They crossed the yard to the baronet's cabin and knocked on the door.
Maggie Stone admitted them to the outer room, where Sir Ralph and
Mistress Beatrix were seated, the girl reading aloud to her father by
the light of one poor candle. But the great fire on the hearth had the
place fairly illuminated.

William Trigget, undismayed by fog and bad weather, cool in any risk of
land or sea, was too abashed at the presence of the lady to tell his
story. So Master Kingswell told it for him.

"The guards must be doubled," said Sir Ralph.

"They be that already, sir," replied Trigget, breaking the spell of the
bright eyes that surveyed him.

"That is well," answered the baronet. "There is nothing else to be done,
at least until morning, but sleep light and keep your muskets handy."

Kingswell and the master mariner returned to the darkness without.

"I will stake my word," said Kingswell, "that the place is surrounded by
the devils even now, and that they will try again to get a man over the
wall to unbar the gates."




CHAPTER XV.

THE HIDDEN MENACE


Neither Kingswell nor Trigget found time for sleep that night. D'Antons
also kept awake, though he spent only a few hours out-of-doors. His
candle burned until daylight. Ouenwa experienced a restless night beside
Black Feather's couch. From ten o'clock until two Tom Bent, John
Trigget, and the younger Donnelly were on guard, with cutlasses on their
hips and half-pikes in their hands--for a musket would have proved but
an unsatisfactory weapon to a man engaged in a sudden scuffle in the
dark. One man was placed on the gun-platform, another at the gate, and a
third on the roof of the storehouse. Kingswell and William Trigget moved
continually from one point to another. At two o'clock the elder
Donnelly, Clotworthy, and Harding relieved their companions. But the two
officers remained at their self-imposed duty.

At last dawn outlined the eastern horizon. Kingswell, who had been
pacing the length of the riverward stockade for the past hour, sighed
with relief, yawned, and was about to retire to D'Antons' cabin, when
William Trigget approached him at a run. The master mariner's face was
ghastly above his bushy whiskers.

"Come this way, sir," he murmured, huskily.

Kingswell followed him to the storehouse and up to the roof, by way of a
rough ladder that leaned against the wall. There, on the outward slope
of the roof, where the snow was trampled and broken, sprawled the body
of Peter Clotworthy.

"What! Asleep!" exclaimed Kingswell, peering close. The light was not
strong enough to disclose the features of the recumbent sentinel.

"Ay, an' sound enough, God knows," replied Trigget, "with no chance o'
wakin' this side o' the Judgment-Seat."

"Dead?" cried the other, sinking to his knees beside the body. He
pressed his hand against the mariner's side, held it there for a moment,
and withdrew it, wet with blood. He raised it toward the growing
illumination of the east, staring at it with wide eyes. "Blood," he
murmured. "Stabbed without a squeal--without a whimper, by Heaven!" Then
he ripped out an oath, and followed it close with a prayer for his dead
comrade's soul. For all his golden curls, this Bernard Kingswell had a
hot and ready tongue--and a temper to suit, when occasion offered.

The two discoverers of the tragedy remained on the roof of the
storehouse for some time. The light strengthened and spread on their
right, and, at last, gave them a clear, gray view of the narrow clearing
and wooded hummocks to the north. On the snow below them, which was
otherwise unmarked, they saw the imprints of one pair of moccasined
feet. The marks did not lead to or from the near cover of the woods, but
to the south, around the fort. The telltale snow showed how Clotworthy's
murderer had approached close under the stockade, and, after his silent
deed of violence, had jumped a distance of about twenty feet, from the
roof of the store, and landed on all fours. A stain of blood, evidently
from the reeking knife in the slayer's hand, smirched the snow where it
was broken by his fall. From there the steps returned by the same
course, but at a distance of about ten paces from the stockade.

Kingswell looked from the tracks in the snow to the colourless,
distorted features of the dead seaman. Then his gaze met Trigget's
deep-set eyes. He was pale, and his lips were drawn in a hard line, as
if the frost had stiffened them.

"Poor Clotworthy," he murmured, and swallowed as if his throat were
dry. "Poor devil, knifed into eternity without a fighting chance. See,
he was clubbed first and then knifed--felled and bled like an ox in a
shambles! Ten nights of this hellishness will account for the whole
garrison."

With a broad, deep-sea oath, Trigget replied that there'd be no ten
nights of it.

They lifted the stiff body that had, so lately, been animated by the
fearless spirit of Richard Clotworthy, able seaman, to the ground and
carried it reverently to the Donnelly cabin. The other inmates of the
little settlement were deeply affected by the sight, and by Kingswell's
story. The younger men were for setting out immediately and driving the
Beothics from the woods on the far side of the river. But the wiser
heads prevailed against such recklessness, arguing that the only thing
to be done was to remain constantly on guard. The women wept. Ouenwa,
trembling with sorrow and rage, placed his fine belt and beaded quiver
beside the body of his dead comrade, and vowed, in English and Beothic,
that he would avenge this murder as he intended to avenge the murders of
his father and his grandfather.

The day passed without any sign of the hidden enemy. Kingswell slept
until noon. By evening Black Feather had recovered enough strength to
enable him to tell his pitiful story to Ouenwa. His lodge, and that of
Montaw, the arrow-maker, had been torn down by the followers of Panounia
shortly after the departure of the _Pelican_ from Wigwam Harbour. Montaw
had died fighting. Black Feather, grievously wounded, had been bound and
carried far up the River of Three Fires. His wife and children also had
been captured and maltreated. The ships in the bay had looked on at the
unequal struggle ashore without demonstrations of any kind. Upon
reaching the village on the river, Black Feather had been driven to the
meanest work--work unbecoming a warrior of his standing--and his wife
and children had been led farther up-stream, very likely to Wind Lake.
Black Feather had seen the body of Soft Hand lying exposed on the top of
a knoll, at the mercy of birds and beasts. He had bided his time. At
last he had gnawed the thongs with which his tormentors bound him at
night, and had safely made his escape. He could not say how long ago
that was. Days and nights had become strangely mixed in his desperate
mind. He had lived on such birds and hares as he had been able to kill
with sticks. Always he had kept up his journey, shaping his course
toward the salt water, in the hope of meeting some tribesmen who might
have remained loyal to the murdered chief. But he had met with nobody
in all that desolate journey, until, only the day before, he had
recovered consciousness in Fort Beatrix.

That night, John Trigget was attacked at his post on the gun-platform,
and in the struggle that ensued was cut shrewdly about the arm. So
sudden and noiseless was the onslaught out of the dark that he fought in
silence, only remembering to shout for help after the savage had
squirmed from his embrace and escaped. His arm was bandaged by Sir
Ralph, and Tom Bent and Ouenwa took his place. But daylight arrived
without any further demonstration on the part of the enemy.

By this time the little garrison was bitten by a restlessness that would
not be denied. Even Kingswell and William Trigget were for making some
sort of attack upon the hidden band beyond the river. D'Antons, contrary
to his habit, had nothing to say either for or against an aggressive
movement. Sir Ralph was for quietly and cautiously awaiting development;
but, seeing the spirit of the men, he agreed that five of the garrison
should sally forth in search of the enemy.

"Whom I have not a doubt you'll find," concluded the baronet, wearily,
"though what the devil you'll do with them then is more than I can
venture to predict."

Under William Trigget's supervision, one of the cannon was taken from
the platform and mounted on a heavy and solid flat of logs, and that, in
turn, was placed on a sled. On the same sled were fastened rammers and
mops and bags of powder and shot. The daring party was made up of Master
Kingswell, William Trigget, Ouenwa, Tom Bent, and the younger Donnelly.
D'Antons did not volunteer his services on the expedition. The men were
all well armed with muskets and cutlasses, and all save Ouenwa had
fastened steel breastplates under their coats. As they marched away,
Mistress Westleigh waved them "Godspeed" with a scarf of Spanish lace,
from where she stood in the open gate between her father and Captain
d'Antons.

The little party moved down the bank and across the river slowly and
with commendable caution. Trigget and Kingswell walked ahead, and kept a
sharp lookout on the dark edges of the forest. Donnelly and Tom Bent
followed about ten paces behind, dragging the gun. Ouenwa scouted along
on the left, with a musket and a lighted match, which he feared far
worse than he did any number of Beothic warriors. The river was crossed
without accident on the wide trail left by the enemy's retreat.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE CLOVEN HOOF


Sir Ralph Westleigh was in the storehouse, Maggie Stone was gossiping
with Dame Trigget, and Beatrix was alone by the fire when Captain
d'Antons rapped on the cabin door, and entered without waiting for a
summons. He was dressed in his bravest suit and finest boots. After
closing the door behind him, he bowed low to the girl at the farther end
of the room. She instantly stood up and curtseyed with a deal of grace,
but no warmth whatever.

"My father is not in, Captain d'Antons," she said.

He smiled and approached her with every show of deference.

"Ah, mademoiselle," he murmured, "I have not come to see the good
baronet. I have come to learn my fate from the dearest lips in the
world."

The girl blushed crimson, with a tumult of emotions that almost forced
the tears past her lids. Fear, hate, and a reckless joy at the thought
that she was done with pretence struggled in her heart. She tried to
speak, but her voice caught in her throat, and accomplished nothing but
a dry sob.

D'Antons' eyes shone with ardour. The hope which had been somewhat
clouded of late flashed clear again. "Beatrix," he cried, softly, "I
have wooed you long. Is it not that I have won at last beyond
peradventure? Do not deny it, my sweet." He caught her to him, and
attempted to kiss her bright lips; but, with a low cry and a quite
unexpected display of strength, she wrenched herself from his embrace.
She did not try to leave the room. She did not call for help. She faced
him, with flashing eyes and angry cheeks and clinched hands.

The fellow stood uncertain for a moment, showing his chagrin and
amazement like any country clown. But his recovery was quick. His mouth
took on a thin smile; his eyes darkened with sinister shadows. He looked
the girl coolly up and down. He laughed softly.

"This feigned anger adds to your beauty, Beatrix," he said.

"I beg you to leave me, sir," she replied, trembling. "Your presence is
distasteful to me."

"A sudden turn," said he. "Now a month ago, or even a week ago, you
seemed of a different mind. As for the days of our first meeting in
merry London--ah, then your lips were not so unattainable."

"I hate you," she murmured. "I despise you. I loath you. You taint the
air for me. Dog, to make a boast of having filched a kiss from a
light-hearted girl--who did not know you for the common fellow that you
are."

"Beatrix," cried the man, "this is no stage comedy. We are not players.
I have asked you, too many times, to be my wife. I ask you once more.
You know that your father's life is in my hands. Tell me now, will you
promise to marry me, or will you let your father go to the gallows in
the spring, and this plantation be put to the torch? Whatever your
choice, my beauty, you will accompany me to New Spain next summer. It is
for you to say whether you go as my wife or my mistress."

At that the girl's face went white as paper. But her eyes were steady.

D'Antons lowered his gaze. He was half-ashamed, nay, more than that, of
his words.

"It would be hard to say," she replied, very softly, "which would be the
most dishonourable position for an English gentlewoman to occupy. That
of your wife, I think, monsieur--for, as your wife, she would be known
by your name."

His shame leaped to anger at that soft-spoken insult. He caught her
roughly by the wrists.

"Nay," she said, "you must be more gentle. You seem to forget that you
are not sacking a defenceless town. Also, you forget that you have not a
friend or a follower in this wilderness, and that any man or woman in
the fort would shoot you down like a dog at a word from me."

For a little while they eyed each other steadily enough--her face still
beautiful despite the bantering cruelty of lips and eyes, and the
loathing in every line of it; his the face of a devil. Then, with a
muttered oath, he closed his fingers on her tender flesh, pressing with
all his strength.

"Ah, my fine lady," he cried, harshly, "you think yourself strong enough
to flout Pierre d'Antons, do you? Strong enough to spurn the protection
of a soldier and a gentleman! Cry now for your girl-faced Kingswell--for
your golden-haired fellow countryman."

By that even her lips were colourless, and her eyes were wet. "There is
no need," she said, bravely, "for I hear my father at the door."

D'Antons dropped her wrists and took a backward step. In doing so, his
heel struck the leg of a stool, and the scabbard of his sword rang
discordantly. He reeled, recovering himself just as Sir Ralph crossed
the threshold. Before either of the men had time to speak, Beatrix
darted forward and struck the Frenchman savagely across the face with
her open hand. Then, without a word of either explanation or greeting to
her father, she passed D'Antons swiftly, sped down the length of the
room, and entered her own chamber.

"What does this mean, captain?" inquired the baronet, coldly. D'Antons,
scarcely recovered from the blow, strode toward him.

"What does it mean?" he cried. "It means, my fine old cock, that your
neck will be pulled out of joint when we get away from this
God-forgotten desolation. Ah, you liar, why did I not have you strung up
to a yard-arm when you were safely in my power? Stab me, but I've been
too soft--and my reward is insults from the wench of an exiled
card-cheat and murderer."

His voice was raised almost to a scream. His face quivered with passion.
He thrust it within a few inches of the baronet's.

"Liar and cheat," he cried, furiously.

"Softly, softly," replied Sir Ralph. "I cannot abide being bawled at in
my own house, especially by such scum of a French muck heap as you. Keep
your distance, fellow, or, by God, I'll do you a hurt. What's this!
You'd presume?"

They withdrew on the instant. The two swords came clear in the same
second of time.

"_Gabier de potence_," cried D'Antons.

"_Canaille_," replied the baronet, blandly. Evidently the rasp of the
steel had mended his temper. He even smiled a little at his adoption of
his adversary's mother-tongue.

The men were excellently matched as swordsmen. But not more than half a
dozen passes had been made and parried before Beatrix ran into the room,
crying to them to put up their swords.

"Go back," said the baronet, with his eyes on D'Antons, "go back to your
room, my daughter, and make a prayer for this fellow's soul. It will
soon stand in need of a petition for God's mercy."

The girl went softly back and closed the door, in an effort to shut out
the rasping and metallic striking of the blades. She prayed, but for
strength to her father's wrist and not for the Frenchman's soul. She was
afraid--desperately afraid. The truth of her father's skill in French
sword-play had been kept from her. To her he was but a courteous,
middle-aged gentleman who needed her care, and who had been maligned and
robbed by the world into which he had been born. He was a good father.
He had been a loving and considerate husband. She knelt beside her bed
and beseeched God to succour him in this desperate strait.

In the meantime the fight went on in the outer room with more the air of
a harmless bout for practice than a duel to the death. It was altogether
a question of point and point, in the Continental manner, perfectly free
from the swinging attack and clanging defence of the English style. The
combatants were cool, to judge by appearances. Neither seemed in any
hurry. The thrusts and lunges, though in fact as quick as thought, were
delivered with a manner suggestive of elegant leisure.

"I believe you have the advantage of me by about three inches of steel,"
remarked the baronet, diverting a lightning thrust from its intended
course.

"A chance of the game," replied D'Antons, smiling grimly.

Just then the baronet's foot slipped on the edge of a book of verses
which Mistress Beatrix had left on the floor. For a second he was
swerved from his balance; and, when he recovered, it was to feel the
warm blood running down his breast from a slight incision in his left
shoulder. But his recovery was as masterly as it was swift, and the
Frenchman found himself more severely pressed than before, despite the
advantage he possessed in the superior length of his sword. The little
wound counted for nothing.

Just what the outcome of the fight would have been, if an untimely
interruption in the person of Maggie Stone had not intervened, it is
hard to say. Perhaps D'Antons' youth would have claimed the victory in
the long run, or perhaps the baronet's excellent composure. In skill
they were nicely matched, though the Englishman displayed superiority
enough to even the difference in the length of the blades. But why take
time for idle surmises? Maggie Stone, looking in, all unheeded, at the
open door, saw her beloved master engaged in a desperate combat with a
person whom she despised as well as feared. She saw the sodden stain of
blood on her master's doublet. In her hand she held a skillet which she
had just borrowed from Dame Trigget. Without waiting to announce
herself, she rushed into the room and dealt Captain d'Antons a
resounding whack on the head with the iron bowl of the utensil. The long
sword fell from the benumbed fingers and clanged on the floor. With a
low, guttural cry, the Frenchman followed it, and sprawled, unconscious,
at the feet of the surprised and indignant baronet.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE CONFIDENCE OF YOUTH


Master Kingswell and his party returned from their daring reconnoitre
early in the afternoon. They had not met with the enemy, though they had
found the camp and torn down the temporary lodges. After that they had
followed the broad trail of the retreat for several miles, and had
discharged the cannon twice into the inscrutable woods. Their daring had
been rewarded by the capture of about two hundred pounds of smoked
salmon and dried venison.

Both Kingswell and William Trigget were unable to account for the fact
that the savages had not attacked them in the cover of the woods. In
reality they owed their bloodless victory to the presence of the little
cannon. That third and last discharge of slugs, on the day of the big
fight, had killed three of the braves, wounded five more, and inspired
an hysterical terror in the hearts of the rest. But for that, the hidden
enemy would not have been content with playing a waiting game and with
the attempted killing of one man each night; and neither would they have
retired, so undemonstratively, before the advance of the five. But,
despite their fear of the cannon, they had no intention of giving up the
siege of the fort. They placed trust in the darkness of night and their
own cunning.

Kingswell and the elder Trigget were drawn aside by Sir Ralph. The
baronet looked less care-haunted than he had for years.

"D'Antons and I have broken our truce," he whispered, "and behold, the
heavens have not fallen,--nor even the poor defences of this
plantation." He smiled cheerfully. "The great captain alone has come to
grief," he added. "Maggie Stone saved him from my hand by felling him
herself with some sort of stew-pan. I was frantically angry at the time,
but am glad now that I did not have to kill the rogue."

"Such cattle are better dead, sir," remarked Trigget, coolly.

"I grant you that, my good William," replied Sir Ralph, "but he is
harmless as a new-born babe, after all--and we'll see that he remains
so."

Then he told them the story of the duel, and of what had led to it.
Kingswell flushed and paled.

"God's mercy!" he cried, "but I would I had been in your boots, sir."

"You'd have died in them, more than likely," replied the baronet, laying
a hand on the other's shoulder. "D'Antons has a rare knowledge of
swordsmanship, and eye and wrist to back it with."

"Even so," replied Kingswell, "it would have been--it would have been a
pleasure to die in such a cause." He blushed, and hurriedly added, "But
I doubt if he'd have killed me, for all his gimcrackery and
side-stepping. I've seen such gentry hopping and poking for hours, when
one good cut from the shoulder would have ended their tricks."

The baronet smiled kindly, though with a tinge of sadness. "Ah, what a
fine thing is the heart of youth," he said, "and the confidence of
youth. I even bow to the ignorance of youth. But, my dear boy, valour
and confidence are not more than half the battle, after all. The edge is
a fine thing, and has spilled a deal of blood since the hammering of the
first sword; but the point becomes no less deadly simply because one
stout young Englishman is ignorant of its potency. Lad, if it were not
that I have won the distinction--beside many a less enviable one--of
being the best swordsman in England, I could not have withstood
D'Antons' play for long enough to make sure of the colour of his eyes."

Kingswell felt like a fool, and did not know which way to turn his
abashed countenance. Both Sir Ralph and Trigget felt sorry for him.

"But I can assure you, Bernard," said the former, "that, if it came to a
matter of cutlasses, neither the Frenchman nor I would stand up for long
against either you or Trigget."

"It is kind of you to say so," replied Kingswell, staring over the
baronet's shoulder at nothing in particular, "but I haven't a doubt that
even Maggie Stone, with her stew-pan, would be more than a match for
me."

William Trigget laughed boisterously at that. "We must ease the young
gentleman's temper, sir," he said to the baronet. "I have a pair of
singlesticks."

"Get them," said the baronet. He slipped his hand under Kingswell's arm
and led him into the cabin. Beatrix welcomed him cordially, with a shy
compliment to his bravery thrown in. The youth immediately felt better
in his pride.

"Say nothing of D'Antons, or the duel," Sir Ralph whispered in his ear.
"He is safe in his own bed, being nursed conscientiously, if not
over-tenderly, by Maggie Stone."

Kingswell seated himself beside Mistress Beatrix on the bench by the
fire. He noticed that she had been weeping. Her eyes seemed all the
brighter for it. He gave her a detailed account of the brief expedition
from which he had just returned. He told of the cluster of lodges, the
cooking-fires still burning, the utensils and food scattered about, and
not a human being in sight.

"And what if you had seen the savages?" she asked. "Surely, four
Englishmen and a lad could do nothing against such a host?"

"We would have fallen in the first flight of arrows," replied Kingswell.

"Then why did you risk it?"

The young man shook his head and laughed. "Some one must take risks," he
said, "else all warfare would come to a standstill."

The girl was looking down at her hands, and reflectively twisting a
jewelled ring around and around on one slim finger. "And I wish it would
with all my heart," she sighed. "Warfare and bloodshed--they are the
devil's inventions, and strike innocent and guilty alike."

"Nay," replied Kingswell, "there is more harm done to the innocent in
courts and fine assemblies, and at the sheltered card-tables, than on
all the battle-fields of the world. War is a good surgeon, and, if he
sometimes lets the good blood with the bad, why, that's just a risk we
must accept."

Beatrix raised a flushed face, and eyed him squarely. "You preach like a
Puritan," she said, "with your condemnation of courts and play. You
should give my father the benefit of some of your wisdom. His friends
have all been generous with such help."

Kingswell bit his lip, and for an awkward minute studied the toes of his
moccasins. Presently he looked up.

"I am sorry," he said.

Her glance softened.

"I am as ignorant of battle-fields as I am of courts," he added. "I am
ignorant of everything."

His voice was low and bitter. Beatrix laughed softly.

"Pray do not take it so much to heart," she said. "Nothing is so easily
mended as ignorance."

He looked at her gravely.

"I am going to ask Sir Ralph to give me lessons in French sword-play,"
he said. "Is there nothing that you would teach me?"

"Embroidery," she replied, "and how to brew a Madeira punch."

At that moment the baronet opened the door and admitted William Trigget.
The master mariner carried a pair of stout oak sticks with basket-work
guards under his arm.

"Does your education commence so soon?" inquired Beatrix of Kingswell.

"Somebody's does," he replied, with a return of his old confidence. With
the lady's permission and Sir Ralph's assistance, Trigget and Kingswell
cleared the middle of the floor of rugs and the table. They removed
their outer coats. Trigget was the taller, as well as the heavier, of
the two. Without further preliminaries, they fell on, and the dry
whacking of the sticks against one another, varied occasionally by the
muffled thud of wood against cloth, filled the cabin. It was a fine
display of the English style--slash, cut, and guard, with never a
side-step nor retreat. After ten minutes of it, Trigget cried "enough,"
and stumbled out of the danger zone. His right arm was numb. His
shoulders and sides ached, and his head swam; Kingswell was without a
touch.

Neither Beatrix nor Sir Ralph, nor yet Trigget, for that matter,
concealed their astonishment at the result of the bout. "And now, sir,"
said Kingswell, "I should like a lesson in the other style."

The baronet took down a pair of light, edgeless blades with blunted
points. After a few words as to the manner of standing, they crossed the
lithe weapons. In a second Kingswell's was jerked from his hand and
sent bounding across the room. He recovered it without a word and
returned to the combat. By this time the light was failing. After about
a dozen passes, he was again disarmed. His gray eyes danced, and he
laughed gaily as he picked up his weapon.

"I see the way of that trick," he said.

He returned to the one-sided engagement with, if possible, more energy
and eagerness than before. Already he had the attitude and stamping
manner of attack to perfection. Sir Ralph tested his defence again and
again without slipping through. Three times he tried the circular,
twisting stroke with which he had disarmed the novice before without
success. Wondering, and slightly irritated, he put out fresh efforts,
and forgot all about his defence. The blades rasped, and rang, and
whispered. The blunted point was at Kingswell's breast, at his throat,
at his eyes; but it never touched. And, just as Mistress Beatrix was
about to bid the combatants cease their exertions, because of the
gathering dusk, Kingswell's point touched the insignificant but painful
wound on the baronet's shoulder. With an exclamation, in which disgust,
pain, and amusement were queerly blended, Sir Ralph dropped his foil to
the floor.




CHAPTER XVIII.

EVENTS AND REFLECTIONS


Captain Pierre d'Antons' injury kept him indoors for ten days. During
that time he saw nobody but Maggie Stone, Bernard Kingswell, and Ouenwa.
Kingswell could not help feeling sorry for him, in spite of the enmity
and distrust in his heart. D'Antons made no mention of how he came by
his cut head to the young Englishman. He knew that the other knew--and
sometimes he wondered how much. He accepted such attentions at
Kingswell's hand as any fair-hearted man will make to any invalid, with
what seemed gratitude and humility. But under the mask his blood was
raging. If his hand trembled while receiving a glass of water from the
Englishman, it was as much from the effort of restraining an outburst of
hate as from weakness. Kingswell, clear-sighted by now, suspected the
real state of the other's feelings.

During the days of D'Antons' inactivity, the Beothics made three night
attacks on the fort. Two were repetitions of the one-man demonstrations
of cunning, in which Clotworthy had met his death and young Trigget had
received the cut on his arm. Happily both had failed. The third was an
attack in force, made in that darkest hour just before the first
stirrings of dawn. By good fortune, both William Trigget and Kingswell
were dressed and about at the time of the first alarm. They both ran to
the gun-platform, and there found Tom Bent desperately engaged with two
savages, who had scaled the stockade over the massed shoulders of their
fellows. The intruders were speedily hurled backward, they and a portion
of the breastworks falling on the devoted heads below. At the moment,
Dame Trigget puffed valiantly up the ladder and handed a torch to her
husband. In a second the coverings were pulled from the guns. The
muzzles of the little weapons were declined as far as they would go, and
the fuses were ignited. Comprehending the trend of affairs, some of the
enemy let fly their arrows at the little group in the torch's
illumination. Both William Trigget and Tom Bent were hit, and fell to
their knees. In the same instant of time the guns belched their flame
and screaming missiles into the wavering mass of savages. A yell of
terror and pain, made up of many individual cries, followed the reports
of the guns like an echo.

But along the opposite stockade, things were not going so well for the
settlers. About a dozen of the enemy had gained foothold on the roof of
the storehouse, and from there had jumped into the yard, driving Peter
Harding before them. They were immediately engaged by the Donnellys.
Torches and lanterns glowed and swung about the edges of the conflict.
Matters were looking serious for the defenders (who by that time were
joined by Sir Ralph, Ouenwa, and the redoubtable Maggie Stone) when the
discharge of artillery across the square turned the courage of the
attackers to water, and their victory to defeat. Six of them were cut
down while endeavouring to escape by way of the ladder against the wall
of the storehouse. The rest got away, but none of them unscathed. With
that the fight ended, though the defenders kept to their posts until
broad daylight.

In the morning it was discovered that one of the six warriors who
remained within the fort was still alive. Sir Ralph had him carried to
D'Antons' cabin, and his wounds attended to. They were not of a serious
nature. Black Feather, who was a convalescent by now, recognized a
bitter enemy in the disabled captive. He was for despatching him
straightway, recalling the bitter days of his slavery and the loss of
wife and children. He was dragged away by Kingswell, and Ouenwa
remonstrated with him at some length.

The little garrison had suffered in the brief engagement. William
Trigget had halted three arrows with his big body. Only one had reached
the flesh, thanks to his thick garments of wool and hide; but that one
had cut deep into the muscles of his chest, and the others had bruised
his ribs. Tom Bent was more seriously injured, with a gaping slash in
the side of his neck. Young Peter Harding was laid on his back with a
cracked rib, dealt him by a stone-headed axe, and seemed in a fair way
to remain on the sick-list for some time to come.

The dead Beothics were carried out and buried in a shallow grave near
the honest Clotworthy's desolate resting-place.

It was evident, from the smoke above the woods, that the enemy were
still maintaining the siege, and at even closer range than before. The
continual sight of that evidence of their presence, and the idleness due
to confinement within a few hundred yards of the stockade, began to tell
on the spirits of the settlers. It became a matter of difficulty to
forget the wounded men in such restricted quarters. Bandages and
salves, gruels and plasters, seemed to pervade every corner. Every one
who was not an invalid was a nurse. In addition, the lack of fresh meat
was beginning to be felt. Sir Ralph, who had seemed more cheerful just
after his affair with D'Antons, was fallen back on his black moods.
Mistress Beatrix's cheeks and eyes were losing something of their
radiance, though she carried herself bravely and cheerfully.

Master Kingswell, who had a knack with bandages and such, found his time
fully occupied. He inspected all the wounded twice a day, and he and
Ouenwa took entire charge of D'Antons and the captured Beothic. His only
recreation was a few hours of each afternoon or evening spent with the
Westleighs. He and the baronet fenced, if the visit happened to be paid
during the day; if in the evening, they sometimes played chess, or,
better still, the baronet paced the room in uneasy meditation, and the
youth and the maiden bent their young heads above the pieces of carved
ivory.

Behind the girl's laughter and hospitality, Kingswell detected an
aloofness toward him that had not been noticeable during the first days
of their acquaintance. The thing was very fine--so fine that it was
scarcely a matter of attitude or manner. One of duller perception would
have missed it altogether. It was in no wise a physical aloofness, save
in a certain reservation in the glance of the eye and the softer notes
of the voice. But it worried the young man. He felt that he had failed
in something--that she had set a standard for him, and that he had not
risen to it. With native shrewdness, he suspected that she considered
him crude and conceited. He knew that she considered him brave, and that
she admired his courage; but he was equally sure that his prowess with
the singlesticks against Trigget, and his increasing dexterity with the
rapier, did not tell in his favour in her eyes. "Women are evidently as
unreasonable as the poets depict them," he decided, and tried to acquire
a modest demeanour. But the ability to do so had not been born in him,
and no matter how low and self-abasing his speech, pride shone in his
clear eyes and self-confidence was in the carriage of head and
shoulders.

The baronet's attitude toward Master Kingswell became more affectionate
every day. He recognized the sterling qualities in the youth,--the
honesty, courage, and loyalty, as well as the physical and mental gifts
of quick eye and wrist and clear brain. He derived no little comfort
from his presence in the fort. He felt that in this golden-haired son of
the Bristol merchant-knight his daughter had a second guardian. He knew
that the Kingswell blood, though not noble by the rating of the College
of Heralds, was to be depended on as surely as any in England. In
happier times he had known and enjoyed a certain amount of familiarity
with the elder Kingswell, and had found the broad-minded merchant's
heart as sound as his self-imported wines. He remembered the wife, too,
as a person of distinction and kindliness.

For his own part, the baronet realized more surely, with the passing of
each narrow day, that life offered no further allurement to him. The
slight exhilaration that had followed the defiance and defeat of
D'Antons was of no more lasting a quality than the flavour of a vintage.
The Frenchman was harmless, poor devil, like the rest of them; and in as
fair a way as himself to leave his bones in the wilderness. Yes, he felt
a twinge of pity for him! He could understand that, to an adventurer
like D'Antons, unrequited love was the very devil,--worse, perhaps, than
the fever of the gaming-table. But of course he felt no regret for
having put an end (as he believed) to the fellow's audacious suit. His
regret--if, indeed, he entertained any concerning so recent an event in
his career--was that he had not pricked the buccaneer's bubble of false
power months before--despite the promise he had made him. But as things
had turned out,--as Time had dealt the cards, to use his own words,--the
other's behaviour had allowed him to strike without too flagrant a
breach of his word of honour. He was thankful for that.




CHAPTER XIX.

TWO OF A KIND


When Pierre d'Antons was able to move about again, he found himself
shunned, without disguise, by every one of the inmates of the fort save
Bernard Kingswell. The West Country sailors, no longer under orders to
treat him with respect and obedience, simply grunted inaudibly and
turned their backs when he addressed them. Of course, the door of Sir
Ralph's habitation was closed against him. He spent almost all his time
in his own cabin, with the captured and slowly convalescing Beothic for
companion. He read a great deal, and thought more. Now and again, in a
fit of chagrin, he would stamp about the room, cursing, crying out for a
chance of revenge, with clinched hands uplifted. During such paroxysms,
the Beothic would watch him closely, with understanding in his gaze. The
savage was no linguist; but hate burns the same signals in eyes of every
nationality.

D'Antons continued to suffer from his infatuation for Mistress
Westleigh. The blow of the skillet had changed nothing of that. Whatever
his passion lacked in the higher attributes of love, it lacked nothing
in vitality. It was a madness. It was a bitter desire. How gladly he
would risk death, fighting for her--and yet he would not have hesitated
a moment about killing her happiness, to win his own, had an opportunity
offered. Self-sacrifice, worshipful devotion, and tenderness were things
apart from what he considered his love for the beautiful English girl.

In this state of mind he built a hundred wild dreams of carrying her
away, and of ultimately imprisoning her, should she still be averse to
his love, in a Southern stronghold. Then a realization of his position
would come over him and set him stamping and raving. To Kingswell,
despite the fire in his heart, he showed a contrite and friendly
exterior. He wondered if he could not turn the young man to some use. He
gave the matter his attention.

One evening D'Antons told a plaintive story to Kingswell. All through it
the Englishman was itching to be gone; for he spent no more of his time
than was absolutely necessary under the Frenchman's roof. But the
narrator held him with a mournful eye. The tale was an alleged history
of Pierre d'Antons' youth. It dealt with a great family that had fallen
upon lean years; with a ruinous chteau, a proud and studious father,
and a saintly mother; with a boyhood of noble dreams and few pleasures;
with a youth of hard and honourable soldiering wherever the banners of
France led the way; and with an early manhood of high adventure and
achievement in the Western colonies.

Kingswell listened coldly, though the other's voice fairly trembled with
emotion. He believed no more of the tale than if he had already heard
the truth of the matter--which was, in plain English, that D'Antons was
the bastard of a blackleg nobleman by a Spanish dancer; that he had
spent his youth as a pot-boy on French ships, and had won, by courage
and cunning, to the position of a captain of buccaneers in early
manhood. The achievements in the Western colonies had been matters of
the wrecking and plundering of what others had built; the high
adventures--God spare me the telling of them!

After Kingswell left him, the pirate fell into one of his reddest moods.
He was sure that the pink-cheeked youth had not believed a word of his
story--had been laughing up his sleeve at the most touching passages. He
was sorry that he had not twisted the lad's neck instead of concluding
the narrative. It was a sheer waste of breath, this artistic lying to
such a pig's head! He jumped to his feet, with a violence that almost
startled the Beothic to outcry, and flung himself about the room like a
madman. He kicked the stolid logs of the walls. He knocked the few
pieces of furniture out of his erratic course, and spilled his books and
papers, quills and ink, to the floor: all this without any ringing oaths
or blistering curses. His rage worked inward, as bodily wounds sometimes
bleed. It played the devil with his limbs, his features, and his hands,
but found no ease in articulation. A trickle of blood ran down his chin,
from where he had set a tooth into his lower lip. Withal, he was such a
daunting spectacle that Red Cloud, the Beothic, crouched fearfully
against the wall, and followed his movements with wide eyes; for, though
a mighty warrior in his own estimation, Red Cloud was a craven at heart.

Presently the tumult of the madness ceased, and the victim of it sank
languidly into a chair beside the Beothic's couch. He groaned and
shivered. For awhile he sat limp, with his thin face hidden between his
hands. Looking up, his eyes met the eyes of the native. In their furtive
regard, he read that which suggested a new move. Though, owing to an
inborn caution, he had never displayed a knowledge of the Beothic
language to his fellow settlers, and had refrained from using any words
of it before Ouenwa, he had picked up a fair idea of it during his
sojourn at Fort Beatrix. Hitherto he had paid but scant attention to Red
Cloud, for he entertained the Spanish attitude of intolerance toward
uncivilized peoples; but now he leaned forward and spoke kindly to his
companion.

It was late when Kingswell and Ouenwa returned to D'Antons' cabin. Under
the new order of things, Ouenwa had volunteered his services as
assistant night-guard of the two prisoners--for the Frenchman was
virtually a prisoner. It was their custom to keep watch turn and turn
about, in two hours' vigils, one sleeping while the other sat in a
comfortable chair by the hearth. Their couch was also by the hearth.
This precaution was taken for fear of some treachery on the part of Red
Cloud.

When the two entered the outer room, the fire was burning brightly, and
by its ruddy light they saw the muffled figure of the Beothic, face to
the wall, in the far corner. They shot the bar of the door. When the
morning was well advanced, they opened windows and door, and replenished
the fire. Kingswell drew aside the curtain between the rooms, and looked
in to see how D'Antons was faring. His fire was out and he was still
abed. Kingswell moved noiselessly across the floor and peered close.
What an awkward figure the graceful buccaneer cut in his sleep! He laid
his hand on the shapeless shoulder. It encountered nothing but yielding
pelts and blankets. He dragged the things to the floor frantically. His
exclamation brought Ouenwa to his side. The Englishman pointed a finger
of dismay at the demolished dummy.

"Tricked!" he cried. "Rip me, but what a fine jailer I am!" They rushed
back to the other room and investigated the figure on the Beothic's
couch. That, too, proved to be a shape of rolled furs and bedding. Red
Cloud also had faded away.

News of the disappearance of D'Antons and the savage went through the
fort like an electric current. The settlers were more interested and
surprised over it than concerned. Even the invalids sat up and
conjectured on the captain's object in fleeing to the outer wilderness,
and the doubtful but inevitable reception by the natives. They could
hardly bring themselves to the belief that he and Red Cloud had gone as
fellow conspirators, remembering the haughty Frenchman's bearing toward
the aborigines with whom he had traded on occasions.

William Trigget shook his head when he heard the story, and rated the
men who had been on duty along the palisade with unsparing frankness.
Sir Ralph looked worried, and Mistress Beatrix looked surprised.

"It seems a very simple trick," she murmured, "to bundle up a few
blankets into lifelike effigies, and then to slip away while the jailer
is elsewhere spending a social evening."

Kingswell flushed hotly, and looked at the girl steadily; but he failed
to meet her eyes.

"Yes," he said, "they slipped away while two men were on guard along the
walls, and while the self-appointed jailer, who has not had four hours'
sleep in any night in the past three weeks, was playing chess with your
ladyship."

"I am sure it is no loss to us," interposed the baronet quickly. "We
have no use for the savage; and as to D'Antons--why, if the enemy kill
him, it will save some one else the trouble. But I cannot help wondering
at him taking so dangerous a risk. If he had been on friendly terms with
the natives at any time, one would have a clue. But he always treated
them like dogs."

Kingswell turned a casual shoulder toward the lady, and gave all his
attention to the baronet and the affair of the Frenchman. The blush of
shame had gone, leaving his face unusually pale. His eyes, also, showed
a change--a chilling from blue to gray, with a surface glitter and a
shadow behind.

"You may be sure," he replied to Sir Ralph, "that D'Antons has taken
what he considers the lesser risk. I'll wager he has won the savage to
him, hand and heart. I was a fool not to have removed Red Cloud to one
of the other huts."

"He was kept to D'Antons' cabin by my orders," said the baronet.

"I had forgotten that," replied Kingswell. "Then I am not the only
scapegrace of the community."

The baronet's face lighted whimsically, and he smiled at the young man.
But the girl did not receive the implication in the same spirit. She
stared at the speaker as if he were some surprising species of bird that
had flown in at the window.

"Such a remark rings dangerously of insubordination," she exclaimed,
"not to mention the impertinence of it."

Sir Ralph looked at her, completely puzzled, and murmured a
remonstrance. It is a wise father that knows his own daughter. Kingswell
turned an expressionless face toward the fire for a moment. Then he
bowed to Sir Ralph. "If I am guilty of impertinence, sir, I humbly crave
your pardon," he said. "As to insubordination--why, I believe there is
nothing to say on that head, as I am a free agent; but I think you
understand, sir, that I and my men are entirely at your service, as we
have been ever since the day we first accepted the hospitality of Fort
Beatrix. My men, at least, have not failed in any duty, whatever my
delinquencies."

With an exclamation of sincere concern, the baronet stepped close to his
friend and placed a hand on either of his shoulders.

"Bernard--my dear lad--why all this talk of pardon, and duty, and
delinquencies, and God knows what else? If you believe that I consider
you guilty of any carelessness, you must think me ungrateful indeed."

His voice, his look, his gesture, all convinced Kingswell that the words
were sincere, and so did something toward the mending of his injured
feelings. To the baronet, his eyes brightened and his manner unbent. He
took his departure immediately after.

Sir Ralph turned to his daughter as the door closed behind Kingswell.

"I do not understand your treatment of him," he said. "Surely you
realize that he is a friend--and friends are not so common that we can
afford to flout them at every turn." He did not speak angrily, but the
girl saw plainly enough that he was seriously displeased.

"The boy is so insufferably self-satisfied," she explained, weakly. "How
indignation would have burned within him had some one else allowed the
prisoners to escape."

The baronet gazed at her pensively for several seconds, and then took
her hand tenderly between his own.

"You do the brave lad an injustice, my sweeting," he said. "What you
take for conceit is just youth, and strength, and fearlessness, and a
clean conscience. He has nothing of the braggart in him--not a hint of
it. I am sorry you like him so little, my daughter, for he is a good lad
and well-disposed toward us."




CHAPTER XX.

BY ADVICE OF BLACK FEATHER


For a time after D'Antons' departure into the unknown, the little
garrison of Fort Beatrix turned day into night. Not a man indulged in so
much as a wink of sleep between the hours of dusk and dawn; but from
sunrise until afternoon the place was as if it lay under an enchantment
of slumber. On the sixth day after the flight of the Frenchman and Red
Cloud, Ouenwa approached Kingswell with a request to be allowed to leave
the fort, in company with Black Feather. He told how Black Feather was
of the opinion that many of the tribesmen were against the leadership of
Panounia, and that, if they could be found, it would be an easy matter
for Ouenwa to win their support. He, Ouenwa, was of the blood of the
greatest chief they had ever known. They would gather to the totem of
the Bear. Assured of the friendship of the English people, they could be
brought to the rescue of the settlement. So Black Feather had told the
tale to Ouenwa, and so Ouenwa believed.

"And you would have to go with Black Feather?" inquired Kingswell, none
too cheerfully; for he looked upon the lad as a very dear younger
brother.

"Truly, my friend-chief, for I am the grandson of Soft Hand," replied
the boy. "When they see me, their blood will rise at the memory of Soft
Hand's murder. I will talk great words of my love for the English, and
of my hatred for Panounia, and of the great trading that will be done at
the fort when the night-howlers have been driven away. Thus we shall all
be saved--thus Mistress Beatrix shall escape capture."

At that Kingswell started and eyed his companion keenly. "You think
Panounia can break into the fort?" he inquired.

Ouenwa smiled. "Hunger can do it before the snow melts," he replied,
"and hunger will fight for Panounia and the black captain."

"What do you know of the black captain?"

"He is with the night-howlers. He will keep their courage warm. He will
struggle many times to bring us to our deaths and to capture the lady.
That is all I know."

"But how do you know so much, lad?" asked Kingswell.

Ouenwa looked surprised. "How could I know less, who dwelt within
eyeshot of the black captain for so many days, and who have learned the
ways of such wolves?" he asked, in his turn. "You know it already
without my telling, friend-chief," he added.

"Let us to Sir Ralph for his advice," said the other.

Master Kingswell had not crossed the threshold of the baronet's cabin
since the time of his rebuff at the hands of Mistress Beatrix. Of course
he had seen the baronet frequently, and they had smoked some pipes of
tobacco together by the hearth of the departed Frenchman; but from the
presence of the lady he had kept off as from a lazaretto. At the voice
of duty, however, he sought the baronet in his own house with excellent
composure. Anger at the knowledge that a girl could hurt him so nerved
him to accept the risk of again seeing the displeasure in her dark eyes.

Mistress Beatrix was not in the living-room when they entered. Sir Ralph
welcomed them cordially. Upon hearing Ouenwa's and Black Feather's plan
for winning some of the tribesmen to the succour of the fort, he was
deeply moved. He took a ring from his own hand and slipped it over one
of Ouenwa's fingers. He gave the lad a fine hunting-knife for Black
Feather, and a Spanish dagger for himself. He told Kingswell to supply
them unstintingly from the store, with provisions and clothing for
themselves and gifts for the natives whom they hoped to win.

"'Tis a chance," said he to Kingswell. "A chance of our salvation, and
the only one, as far as I can see."

At that moment Mistress Beatrix entered the room. At sight of the
visitors by the chimney, she swept a grand curtsey. The visitors bowed
low in return. Her father advanced and led her, with the manner of those
days, to his own chair beside the hearth. He told her, in a few words,
of the venture upon which Ouenwa and Black Feather intended to set
forth. The thought of it stirred the girl, and she looked on Ouenwa with
shining eyes.

"'Tis a deed for the great knights of old," she said. "Lad, where have
you learned your bravery?"

Unabashed, Ouenwa stood erect before her. "Half of it is the blood of my
fathers," he replied, "and half is the teaching of Master Kingswell--and
half I gather from your eyes."

The girl flushed with suppressed merriment. The baronet concealed his
lips with his hand. Kingswell clutched his outspoken friend by the
shoulder.

"Brother, you have named one-half too many," he said, laughing, "so your
reason will carry more weight if you leave out that in which you mention
my teaching. But come, we must find Black Feather, and make arrangements
to leave as soon as dusk falls."

At that Beatrix tightened her hands on the arms of the chair and turned
a startled face toward the speaker. "Surely, sir, you do not mean to
leave us, too!" she exclaimed.

Neither the baronet nor Kingswell were looking at her; but Ouenwa saw
the expression of eyes and lips. Kingswell, however, did not miss the
note of anxiety in the clear young voice.

"I do not go with them, mistress," he said, "because my company would
only delay their movements. And perhaps even spoil their plans. I am a
poor woodsman--and already our garrison is none too heavily manned."

"I am glad you are not going," replied the girl, quietly. "I am sure
that my father looks upon you as his right hand, and that the men need
you."

Sir Ralph looked at his daughter with ill-concealed surprise.
Kingswell, murmuring polite acknowledgment of her gracious words, strove
to get a clearer view of her half-averted face. He failed. Ouenwa was
the only one of the three who knew that the words were sincere; but he
had the advantage of his superiors in having caught sight of the sudden
fear in the lady's face.

Sir Ralph and Kingswell lowered the light packs over the stockade to
Ouenwa and the big warrior. When the figures merged into the gloom,
heading northward, the two commanders descended from the storehouse and
entered the baronet's cabin. Beatrix was by the fire, radiant in fine
apparel.

"I am in no mood for chess," said Sir Ralph. "The thought of those two
brave fellows stealing through the dark and cold fidgets me beyond
belief."

He began his quarter-deck pacing of the floor--up and down, up and down,
with his head thrust forward and his hands gripped behind his back.

"The wind is rising," said the girl to Kingswell. "It will be bleak in
the forest to-night--away from the fire."

She shivered, and held her jewelled hands to the blaze.

"It is blowing for a storm," replied the young man. "The sky was clouded
over when they left. 'Tis safer for them so. The snow will cover their
trail and, very likely, will keep the enemy from prowling abroad for a
good many hours to come."

Mistress Beatrix crossed the room to a cupboard in the wall, and from it
produced a violin. Kingswell stood by the chimney, watching her. The
baronet continued his nervous pacing of the floor. The girl touched the
strings here and there with skilful fingers, resined the bow, and then
returned to the hearth and stood with her eyes on the fire. Suddenly she
looked up at Kingswell. Her eyes were as he had never seen them before.
They were full of firelight and dream. They were brighter than jewels,
and yet dark as the heart of a deep water.

"Please do not stand," she said, and her voice, though free from any
suggestion of indifference, sounded as if her whole being were far from
that simple room. Her gaze returned to the fire. Kingswell quietly
reseated himself; and at that she nestled her chin to the glowing
instrument and drew the bow lightly, lovingly, almost inquiringly,
across the strings. A whisper of melody followed the touch and sang
clearer and more human than any human voice, and melted into the
firelight.

At the first strain of the music, the baronet sat down and reclined
comfortably with his head against the back of his chair. For awhile he
watched his daughter intently; then he turned his eyes to the heart of
the fire and journeyed far in a waking dream.

The girl played on and on, weaving enchantments of peace with the magic
strings. Kingswell, leaning back with his face in the shadow, could not
look away from her. The minutes drifted by unheeded behind the singing
of the violin. The candles on the table flared at their sockets. The
logs on the hearth broke, and the flames sprang to new life. Outside the
wind raced and shouldered along the walls. And suddenly the player
stilled her hand, and, without a word to either of the men, took up one
of the guttering candles from the table and went quickly to her own
chamber. She carried the fiddle with her against her young breast, and
the bow like a wand in her hand.

Sir Ralph started and sat erect in his chair. Kingswell got to his feet
with a sigh, and lifted his heavy cloak from the bench.

"I must go the rounds," he said. "Good night, sir."

With that he went out into the swirling eddies of the storm. The baronet
sat still for another hour. The music had uncovered so many ghosts of
joy and song, of love and hate and shame. It had rung upon past glories
and called up more recent dishonours. And still another matter occupied
his mind, and was finally dismissed with a smile and a yawn. It was that
Beatrix had indulged in one of her deliriums of music in young
Kingswell's presence, and that she had never before played in any mood
but the lightest in the hearing of a stranger.

Kingswell paced beside the sentry at the drifted gate; but he kept his
thoughts to the picture of the girl, the glowing fiddle, and the music
and firelight that had seemed to pulse and spread together about the
long room. Again he saw the candle flames leap high and waver, as if
lured from their tethers by the crying of the instrument. But clearest
of all was the player's face. His heart was filled to suffocation at the
memory of it. Had other men seen her so beautiful? Had other men heard
her soul and her dear heart singing and crying from the strings of the
violin?




CHAPTER XXI.

THE SEEKING OF THE TRIBESMEN


Ouenwa and Black Feather turned their faces from the little fort and the
hostile camp beyond the white river, and set bravely forward into the
darkness. Black Feather led the way, avoiding hummocks, bending and
twisting through the coverts, crossing the open glades like a
shadow--and all without any noise except the scarcely audible padding of
his stringed shoes. Ouenwa trod close after. They had not gone far
before the snow began to fall and puff around them in blinding clouds.
The trees bent tensely under the lash of the wind. More than one
frost-embrittled spire came crashing down. Still the warrior and the lad
held on their journey, for they were both fresh and strong, and eager to
widen the spaces of wilderness between themselves and the camp of
Panounia.

Shortly before dawn they dug a trench in the snow on the leeward side of
a thicket of low spruces, broke fir-branches for a bed, built a fire
between the walls of white, and cooked and ate a frugal repast, and
then rolled themselves in their rugs of skin and fell asleep. They had
no fear that any of Panounia's people would disturb their slumbers. They
lay as motionless and unknowing as logs for several hours. Then Ouenwa
turned over and yawned, and Black Feather sat up, wide-awake in an
instant. The morning was bright and unclouded. The white sun was
half-way up the blue shell of the eastern sky. All around the new snow
lay in feathery depths. On the dark firs and spruces it clung in even
masses, which showed that the wind had died down long before the flakes
had ceased to fall. Ouenwa and his comrade ate frugally of cold meat and
bread, swallowed some brandy and water, and resumed their journey.

Not until the afternoon of the third day following their departure from
Fort Beatrix did the travellers sight the smoke of a fire. It was Black
Feather, attaining the summit of a ridge a few paces ahead of Ouenwa,
who caught the first sight of the thin, melting signal of human life. It
wavered up from a wood in a valley a few hundred of yards in front. On
their right hand lay the ice-edged gray waters of an arm of the sea. On
their left stretched dark forest and empty barren to a mountainous
horizon. In front lay hope, and behind the spur of menace.

"Is there a village yonder?" asked Ouenwa.

Black Feather replied negatively.

"The stream is Little Thunder," he said, in his own language, "and there
was no lodge there when last I saw it. We will approach under the
shelter of those spruces in the hollow. It makes the journey a few paces
longer, and perhaps the arrival twenty times safer."

Ouenwa nodded his sympathy with the caution expressed by his friend.

"But let us hurry," he said. "Remember that around the stockade the
black captain is ever stirring the courage of the night-howlers."

At last, creeping on all fours, they peered from the screen of brush
into a tiny clearing on the north bank of Little Thunder. The stream was
not ten yards across at this point. On its white surface ran several
trails of snow-shoes. The smoke which had attracted them to the place
curled up from the apex of a large, bark-roofed wigwam. As the
travellers watched, an old woman appeared in the doorway of the lodge.
Ouenwa recognized her as a wise herb-doctor who had been a friend and
adviser of Soft Hand. He whispered the information to Black Feather.

"Then we may show ourselves," said the other, "for if this woman was
the great chief's friend you may be sure that death has only
strengthened her loyalty. It is so with women--with the wise and the
foolish alike. A man will stand close to his comrade in the days of his
glory and in the press of battle; but it is the squaw who keeps the
fallen shield freshly painted and the cause of the departed ever before
the matters of the present day. A man must have the reward of his
friend's praise and the joy of his companionship; but a woman makes a
god of the departed spirit and looks for her reward beyond the red
gates."

Ouenwa had nothing to say to his friend's sage reflections, for all he
knew of women was that a radiant creature far back in Fort Beatrix had
his heart in thrall. So he led the way from cover, and down the bank, in
silence.

The old squaw in the doorway of the lodge caught sight of them
immediately. She turned into the dark interior of the wigwam, but
appeared before they were half-way across the frozen stream, with a bow
in her hand and an arrow on the string. Black Feather and the lad raised
their right hands, palms forward, above their heads, and continued to
advance. The old hag lowered her weapon, but did not relax her attitude
of vigilance. Close to the rise of the bank the travellers paused, and
the lad called out that he was Ouenwa, grandson of Soft Hand, and that
his companion was Black Feather, the adopted son of Montaw, the
arrow-maker. At that the guardian of the wigwam forsook her post and
advanced to meet them.

The herb-doctor, who had been one of Soft Hand's advisers, was not
attractive to the eye. She was bent hideously, though still of
surprising bodily strength. Her head was uncovered, save for the matted
locks of hair that clung about it and fell over her ears and neck like a
wig of gray tree-moss. Her eyes were deep and black and fierce. One
yellow fang stood like a sentinel in the cavity of her mouth. Her hands
were claws. Her skin was no lighter in hue and no finer in texture than
was the tanned leather of her high-legged moccasins. Her garments were
unusually barbaric--lynx-skins shapelessly stitched together and hung
about with belts and charms, and a great knife of flint nearly as long
as a cutlass. Her corded, scraggy arms hung naked at her sides, as
indifferent to the nip of the frost as to the regard of strange eyes.

"Child," she said, "I heard that you were killed--that Panounia's men
had slain you and a party of English; but that I knew to be false, for I
saw not your spirit with the spirits of your fathers. So I believed
that you had crossed the great salt water with the strangers."

Ouenwa told his story, to which the old woman listened with the keenest
interest and many nods of the head.

"It is well," she said. "They are scattered now, some in hiding, some
sullenly obedient to Panounia, and some in captivity. Your need will
bring them together and awake their sleeping courage. I know of a full
score of stout warriors who will draw no bow for Panounia, and who are
all within a day's journey of this spot, but sadly scattered,--yea,
scattered in every little hollow, like frightened hares."

"Do you live in this great lodge all by yourself?" inquired Black
Feather.

"My sons are in the forest, seeing to their snares," replied the woman,
eying the tall brave sharply, "but within are a sick woman and a small
child who escaped, ten days ago, from one of Panounia's camps."

She stood aside and motioned them to enter the lodge. Ouenwa went ahead,
with Black Feather close at his heels. Within, it took them several
seconds to adjust their eyes to the gloom of smoke and shadow. Presently
they made out a couch of fir-branches and skins beyond the fire, and on
it a woman, half-reclining, with her arm about a child. Both the woman
and the child were gazing at the visitors. The child began to whimper.

Black Feather uttered a low cry, and sprang over the fire. He had found
his squaw and one of his lost children.

The sickness of Black Feather's wife was nothing but the result of
hardship and ill-treatment. Already, under the herb-doctor's care, she
was greatly improved. The meeting with her warrior went far to complete
the cure of the old woman's broths and soft furs. The child was well;
but the woman knew nothing of the whereabouts of their elder offspring.

Ouenwa and Black Feather did not tarry long at the lodge beside Little
Thunder. With the younger of their aged hostess's sons for guide, they
set out that same day to find the hidden warriors who were against the
leadership of Panounia.




CHAPTER XXII.

BRAVE DAYS FOR YOUNG HEARTS


Back at Fort Beatrix the time passed in weary suspense. The wounded men
recovered slowly. The enemy remained inactive beyond the river and the
dark forest. Only the haze of their cooking-fires, melting against the
sky, told of their presence. The inaction ate into the courage of the
English men and women like rust. The boat-building and the iron-working
at the forge were carried on listlessly, and without the old-time spurs
of song and laughter. Even William Trigget and Tom Bent displayed sombre
faces to their little world.

Bernard Kingswell, however, found life eventful. He was not blind to the
danger of their position, and he continued to do double duty in
everything; but for all that he awoke each day with keen anticipation
for whatever might befall, and, sleeping, dreamed of other things than
the poised menace and the monotony. Why should he regret Bristol, or any
other city of the outer world, when Beatrix Westleigh was domiciled
within the rough walls of the fort on Gray Goose River? His heart would
not descend to those depths of despondency in which lurk fear and
hopeless anxiety. What power of man, in that wilderness, could break
down his guard and harm the most wonderful being in the world? The
girl's brief season of unkindness toward him was as a cloud that her
later friendliness had dispersed as the sun disperses the morning fog.
He had caught a glimpse of her heart in her music, in her eyes, in her
voice, and on several occasions something that had set his heart
thumping in the touch of her hand. At least she was neither averse nor
indifferent to his society, and the glances of her magnificent eyes were
open to translations that set him looking out upon life and that
wilderness through a golden haze. Let a dozen black-visaged D'Antons
draw their rapiers upon him--he would out-thrust, out-play, and
out-stamp them all! Let a hundred fur-clad savages howl about the
fort--he, Bernard Kingswell, with his lady's favour on his breast, would
scatter them like straw! And all this because, for the first time in his
life of twenty-one years, he was bitten with love for a woman,--and
twenty-one was a fair, manly age in those days. He had won to it
unknowingly, by the brave paths of adventure and the sea. So let not
even the oldest of us criticize his attitude toward life. A man's
emotions cannot always be herded and driven by the outward circumstances
of need and danger, like a flock of sheep at the mercy of a dog and a
dull countryman. That to which cautious Worldliness has given the name
of madness, from the earliest times, is nothing but a spark of God's own
courage and imagination in the heart of youth: the years having not yet
smothered it with the ashes of cowardice and calculation.

Bernard Kingswell had never displayed any but an assured front to the
world. Now this love that had him so irresistibly in its services only
heightened the confidence of his address toward men and events; but in
the presence of its inspiration it clothed him in unaccustomed and
unconscious meekness. You may be sure that Beatrix had been quick to
notice the change. It pleased her mightily, of course; for was it not a
greater and a more pleasant matter to have brought a high-hearted,
adventure-bred youth like this to bondage and slavery than to have a
dozen idle courtiers bowing before one, and a dozen sentimental poets
mouthing verses that could, with equal sincerity, be applied to any
charming lady? So Mistress Beatrix decided, and could not find it in her
heart to regret the beaux of London Town. But she did not know her
heart as the man knew his--and as she knew his.

One morning they walked together along the river-bank, before the open
gate of the fort. The air was clearer than any crystal. The shadows
along the snow were bluer than the dome of the sky. The girl talked
cheerily; for in the bright daytime, with the sounds of peaceful labour
rising from the fort so close at hand, and with a strong and worshipping
man, sword-girt, within arm's length, it was hard to remember the menace
concealed by the southern woods. Her eyes were very bright, and the
blood mantled under the clear skin of her cheeks at the wind's caress.
Now and then, for a bar or two, she broke into song.

Their path was one that Kingswell had beaten firm with his snow-shoes,
after the last storm, expressly as a promenade for Mistress Westleigh.
It was about a hundred yards in length, and broad enough for two persons
to walk in abreast, and firm enough to make the wearing of snow-shoes
unnecessary. It ran north and south, parallel with the stockade and the
course of the river at that point. When the turn was made at either end
of the beat, Kingswell's glance searched the horizon and every tree,
every knoll, and hollow. It was done almost unconsciously, as a
traveller instinctively loosens his sword in its sheath at the sound of
voices ahead of him on a dark road.

After a time the girl noticed her companion's vigilance. "What do you
expect to see?" she asked, touching his arm lightly and swiftly with her
gloved hand. For a moment he was confused, but recovered his wits with
an effort.

"Nothing," he replied, "or surely we would not be walking here."

She smiled at that. "Are you afraid?" she inquired.

He looked down at her, displayed the desperate condition of his heart in
his eyes, and then looked back again to the strip of woods that
approached them along the back.

"I am not afraid," he said--and then, with a gasp of dismay, he caught
her and swung her behind him. She did not resist, but cowered against
his sheltering back.

"We must return to the fort," he said. "Something is going on in that
covert."

"Come! We will run!" she whispered, pulling at his elbows to turn him
around.

"No," he replied. "I shall walk backwards, and you must keep behind me,
and guide me. It is no great matter to avoid an arrow, if one knows in
what quarter to look for it."

She made no reply. They began the retreat along the narrow branch path
that led to the gate of the fort, he stepping cautiously, heels first,
and she pulling at his belt and gazing fearfully past his shoulder at
the woods. They were within a few yards of the gate when he suddenly put
his arms behind him, caught her close, and lurched to one side. The
unexpected movement threw the girl to her knees in the deep snow beside
the path. Her cry of dismay brought her father and two others from the
fort. They found Kingswell staggering and confusedly apologizing to
Beatrix for his roughness. In the thickness of his left shoulder stuck a
war-arrow. Supporting Kingswell and fairly dragging the frightened girl,
they rushed back to safety and closed and barred the gate.

Hour after hour passed without the hidden warriors of Panounia making
any further signs of hostility, or even of their existence. The watchers
on the stockade scanned the woods in vain for any movement. A shot was
fired into the nearest cover from one of the cannon, but without
apparent effect.

Kingswell was on duty again within an hour of the receiving of his
wound. The ragged cut caused him a deal of pain; but the salve that
really took the sting and ache out of it was the thought that he had
been serving Beatrix as a shield when the arrow struck him. He went the
rounds of the stockades with a glowing heart and dauntless bearing, and
his air of calm assurance put courage into the men. He saw to the
strengthening of several points of the defence, cleared the loopholes of
drifted snow, and gave out an extra supply of powder and ball.

It was dusk of that day before Kingswell again saw Mistress Westleigh.
He was passing the baronet's cabin, and she opened the door and called
to him shyly. He turned and stepped close to her, the better to see her
face in the gathering twilight. She extended her hands to him, with a
quick gesture of invitation. He dropped his heavy gloves on the snow
before clasping them in eager fingers.

"But you must not stand here, without anything 'round your shoulders,"
he said; but, for all his solicitude, he maintained his firm hold of her
hands. She laughed, very softly, and a slight pressure of her fingers
drove his anxiety to the winds. He would have nothing of evil befall
her, God knows!--nay, not so much as a chill--but how could he keep it
in his mind that she wore no cloak when his whole being was a-thrill
with love and worship? So he stood there, speechless, gazing into her
flushed face. Presently her eyes lowered before his ardent regard.

"I called to you to thank you for saving my life," she murmured. He had
nothing to say to that. Perhaps he had saved her life--and again,
perhaps he had not. At that moment he was the last person in the world
to decide the question. His heart and mind were altogether with the
immediate present. He realized that her hands were strong and yet tender
to the touch of his. The faint fragrance of her hair was in his brain
like some divine vintage. The sweet curves of cheek and lips--how near
they were! She had called to him with more than kindness in her voice.
God had made a high heaven of this fort in the wilderness.

"You were very brave," she said, leaning nearer ever so slightly. Sweet
madness completely overthrew the lad's native caution, and he was about
to catch her to him bodily, when she slipped nimbly into the cabin, and
left him standing with arms extended in silent invitation toward the
figure of the imperturbed Sir Ralph.

"Well, my lad?" inquired the baronet, calmly.

"Good evening to you, Sir Ralph," replied Kingswell, hiding his chagrin
and confusion with exceeding skill.

"You looked just now as if you were expecting me," said the elder. "Come
in, come in. We can talk better by the fire."

Kingswell's blushes were safe in the dusk. He picked up his gloves from
the trampled snow by the threshold, and silently followed the baronet
into the fire-lit living-room. Beatrix was not there--which fact the
lover noticed with a sinking of the heart. He was alone with her father,
and evidently under marked suspicion,--a fearful matter to a young man
who aspires to the hand of an angel, and has not yet his line of action
quite laid down. He took a deep breath, trembled at thought of his
presumption, called the respectability of his parents and his income to
his aid, and was ready for the baronet when that gentleman turned and
faced him in front of the fire.

"I love your daughter," he said, with his voice not quite so cool and
manly as he had intended it to be.

Sir Ralph bowed, but said nothing. His back was to the fire, and so his
face was in heavy shadow.

"I love her very dearly," continued the other. "I believe no man could
love a woman more, for it is with my whole heart, and with every fibre
of my being. I know, sir, that my rank is not exalted, and that she is
the--"

The baronet raised his hand sharply.

The gesture silenced Kingswell in the middle of his sentence more
effectively than a clap of thunder would have done it.

"Yes," said Sir Ralph, harshly, "she is the daughter of a blackleg. She
is the daughter of a criminal exile. She is the daughter of a broken
gamester. Ay, Bernard, you do indeed look high,--you, the son of a
humble merchant of Bristol."

Kingswell was dismayed for the moment. Then, with a hardy oath, he
slapped his hand to his hip.

"Though she were the daughter of the devil himself," he began, and came
to a lame stop. The baronet's smile passed unseen. It was a kindly
smile, and yet a bitter one by the same tokens. Kingswell gave up all
attempt at politic speech. He had his own feelings to express. "Your
daughter, sir, is the best and the loveliest," he said, huskily.
"Whatever your backslidings and misfortunes have been, they can reflect
in no way on her sweetness, and wisdom, and virtue. But, sir, I do not
mean to sit in judgment on any man, and last of all on the father of the
most glorious woman in the world. I remember you in your strength,--the
greatest man in the county and my father's noble friend. The world has
taken a twirl since then, but you may be sure that, whatever betide, my
heart is with you warmer than my worthy father's ever was."




CHAPTER XXIII.

BETROTHED


That Bernard Kingswell had accepted the baronet's own estimation of his
(the baronet's) character so frankly, in the heat of sentimental
disclosure, did not trouble Sir Ralph by more than a pang or two. What
else could he expect of even this true friend? He was a broken gamester
and a criminal exile by all the signs and by the verdict of the law; but
whether or not he was a blackleg was a matter of opinion and the exact
definition of that word. He knew that Kingswell was well disposed toward
him, and that he believed nothing vile or cowardly of him; but, best of
all, he was sure that, in Kingswell's love, his daughter was fortunate
beyond his hoping of the past two years. Should they get clear of the
besieging natives and out of the wilderness, her future happiness,
safety, and position would be assured. As Mistress Bernard Kingswell,
she would live close to the colour and finer things of life again,
gracing some fair house as a former Beatrix had done in other days--to
wit, the great houses of Beverly and Randon. The mist blurred his eyes
at that memory and dimmed his vision against the rough log walls around
him.

Another thought came to the broken baronet, as he sat alone by the
falling fire, after Kingswell's departure, and awaited his supper and
the reappearance of his daughter. The thought was like a black shadow
between his face and the comforting fir sticks--between his heart and
the knowledge of a good man's love and protection for Beatrix. Knowing
the girl as he did, he felt sure that she would never leave him, her
exiled father, even at the call of a more compelling love; and, as a
return to his own country meant prison or death to him, she would hold
to the wilderness, thereby leaving the new-found happiness untouched. On
the other hand, should death come to him soon, and in the
wilderness,--by the arrows of the enemy, for choice,--his daughter's
fetters would be filed for ever. He sank his face between his hands. The
desire to live out one's time clings about a man's vitals against all
reason. Even an exiled and broken gamester, stockaded in a nameless
wilderness and hemmed in by savages, finds a certain zest in day and
night and the winds of heaven. With nothing to live for--even with the
scales decidedly the other way--Death still presents an uninviting face.
It may be the inscrutable mask of him that fills with distrust the heart
of the man who contemplates the Long Journey. In that inevitable yet
mysterious figure, showing as no more than a shadow between the bed and
the window, it is hard for the sinful mortal, no matter how repentant,
to read clear the promise of eternal peace. What dark deed might not be
perpetrated by the shrouded messenger between the death-bed and
Paradise?

Sir Ralph bowed his head between his palms, and hid the commonplace,
beautiful radiance of the hearth-fire from his eyes; and so, while he
waited for his supper of stewed venison, he reasoned and planned for his
daughter's future to the bitter end, seeing clearly that, should the
chances of battle turn in favour of the little plantation, he must
readjust his sentiments toward death. A man of lower breeding and
commoner courage would have groaned in the travail of that thought, and
cursed the alternative; but the baronet sat in silence until he heard
his daughter at the door, and then stood up and hummed softly the
opening bars of a Somerset hunting-song.

Beatrix tripped close to her father and raised her face to him. He bent
and kissed her tenderly. For a little while they stood without speaking,
hand in hand, on the great caribou skin before the hearth. Suddenly the
girl pressed her cheek against his shoulder.

"What was it," she whispered, breathlessly,--"the matter that held you
and Bernard in such serious converse?"

"And has your heart given you no hint of it?" he laughed.

"And why, dear father? What has my heart to do with your talk of guards
and ammunition and supplies,--save that it is with you in everything?"

The baronet released her hand and, instead, placed his arm about her
slender and rounded waist. "It is a story that I cannot tell you,
sweet,--I, who am your father," he said. "But I think that you shall not
have to wait long for the telling of it, for both youth and love are
impatient. And here comes the good Maggie with the candles."

During the meal the baronet was more lively and entertaining than
Beatrix had seen him for years, and Beatrix, in her turn, was unusually
untalkative and preoccupied. The girl wanted to give her undivided
attention to the quiet voice of her heart. The man was equally anxious
to avoid introspection as she to court it. But he, for all his laughter
and gay stories of gay times spent, displayed a colourless face and
haunted eyes behind the candle-light; while she, sitting in silence,
glowed like a rare flower. Her dark, massed tresses, her eyes of
unnamable colour, her throat and lips and brow, were all radiant with
the magic fire at her heart.

Sir Ralph, after bringing a disjointed tale to a vague ending, sipped
his wine, put down the glass clumsily, and suddenly turned away from the
table. The bitterness of his lot had caught him by the throat. But she
noticed nothing of his change of manner; and presently they left the
table and moved to the fire. He busied himself with heaping faggots
across the dogs. Then she filled his tobacco-pipe for him, and lit it
with a coal from the hearth, puffing daintily. He had just got it in his
hand when a knocking sounded on the door, and Maggie Stone opened to
Kingswell.

Upon Kingswell's entrance, Sir Ralph, after greeting him cordially but
quietly, donned his cloak and hat, and begged to be excused for a few
minutes. "I have a word for Trigget," he said. Then he pulled on his
gloves, pushed open the door, and stepped out to the dark.

Two candles burned on the table. Maggie Stone snuffed them, surveyed
the room and its inmates with a comprehensive glance, and at last forced
her unwilling feet kitchenward again. Her heart was as sentimental as
heroic, was Maggie Stone's, and her nature was of an inquisitive turn.
She sighed plaintively as she left the presence of the young couple.

The door leading to the kitchen had no more than closed behind the
servant than Bernard, without preliminaries, dropped on one knee before
the lady of his adoration, and lifted both her hands to his lips. She
did not move, but stood between the candles and the firelight, all
a-gleam in her beauty and her fine raiment, and gazed down at the golden
head. Her lips smiled, but her eyes were grave.

"Dear heart," murmured the lad, without lifting his face or altering his
position,--"dear heart, can it be true?"

She bent her head a little lower. Her heart seemed as if it was about to
break away from its bonds in her side. She could not speak; but, almost
unconsciously, she closed her fingers upon his.

"Tell me," he cried. And again, with a note of fear in his voice: "Tell
me if I may win you! Tell me if your heart has any promise?"

Before she could control her agitation sufficiently to answer him, the
outer door of the cabin was swung open without ceremony, and Sir Ralph
stamped in. He caught Kingswell by the wrist and wrenched it sharply.

"We are attacked," he cried. "They have piled heaps of dry brush along
the palisades--and they have set the stuff on fire! It burns like mad.
Lord, but it looks more like hell than ever!"

Even as he spoke, the fragrant, biting odour of the smoke from the
burning evergreen-needles invaded the room. Kingswell got quickly to his
feet, still holding the girl's hands. He did not look at the baronet.
For a second he paused and peered, questioning, into her wonderful eyes.

"Oh, I love you, dear heart," she cried, faintly. "I love you, Bernard."

He stooped quickly (and how eagerly every lover knows), and even while
the first brief and tremulous kiss was sweet on their lips, the muskets
clapped deafeningly, savage shouts rang high, and the baronet thrust
sword and hat into Bernard's hands.

"Come! For God's grace, lad, come and rally the men!" he shouted.

Then the lover turned from his mistress and saw the shrewd work that
awaited him. He ran to it with a leaping heart.




CHAPTER XXIV.

A FIRE-LIT BATTLE. OUENWA'S RETURN


The heaps of brush outside the palisades burned with a long-drawn
roaring, like the note of a steady wind. It was a terrifying sound. The
glare of the conflagration lit the interior of the fort, staining the
trampled snow of the yard to an awful hue, staining the faces of the
desperate settlers as if with foreshadowing of blood, and painting the
walls of the cabins as if for a carnival. The platform upon which the
guns stood was a mass of flame before any use could be made of the
pieces. The breastwork of faggots burned with leapings and roarings,
flinging orange and crimson showers to the black dome above. The savages
skirmished behind the girdle of flames, like imps along the
blood-coloured snow. The settlers discharged their muskets through the
singed loopholes, firing low, and taking the chances with heroic
fortitude. Sir Ralph and Bernard Kingswell were here and there, with
their swords in their hands and encouragement in speech and bearing.
Both knew that this engagement would be a fight to the finish; and both
felt reasonably sure that a shrewder and braver commander than Panounia
was against them.

The ammunition was carried from the storehouse to the shed over the
well, for the fire was already crackling against the log walls of the
buildings. Suddenly a sharp report and a high shower of sparks and
burning fragments broke from the gun-platform; and, for the moment, the
warriors were scattered from that side. One of the cannon had exploded.
That corner of the stockade immediately fell and settled to the snow.
Next instant the second gun was fired by the flames. It sent its whole
charge into the uncertain Beothics, scattering them to cover in yelling
disorder. At that the Englishmen cheered, and set about fighting back
the encroaching flames.

Inspiration, or a font of courage to be drawn upon at need, must have
dwelt behind the shelter of the spruces; for within a very few minutes
of the retreat, all the warriors, save the wounded, were about the fort
again. Kingswell took note of it, and suspected the inspiration to be
nothing else than Pierre d'Antons' insinuating presence and dazzling
smile. A spur, too, he suspected--the spur of the mongrel Frenchman's
evil sneer and black temper. He knew enough of the aboriginal character
to feel that it would prove but a plaything for such a personality as
the buccaneer's. He looked across the glowing, smoking breach in the
fortifications with hard eyes. He voiced his desire to have the fellow
by the throat, or at the point of his sword, in tones that rang like a
curse.

Suddenly Kingswell left his post and ran to the well-house.

He knew where the _Pelican's_ powder lay among the stores, done up in
five canvas bags of about twelve pounds each. With two of these under
his cloak, he returned to his place a few paces from the subsiding red
barrier that still held the enemy from the interior of the fort. By this
time the back of Trigget's cabin was smouldering. The roofs of the
cabins, deep with snow, were safe; but the rear walls were all in a fair
way of being ignited by the crackling brushwood, which the warriors of
Panounia diligently piled against them.

Kingswell left the protection of the rest of the square to Sir Ralph,
William Trigget, and all the men of the garrison save Tom Bent. The old
boatswain was, by this time, a very active convalescent. Kingswell
whispered a word or two in his ear. They kept a sharp lookout across the
wreckage of the fallen corner of the stockade. They saw a party of the
enemy gather ominously close to the glowing edge of the breach.
Kingswell passed one of the bags of powder to his companion. "When I
give the word," he said.

Suddenly the black knot of warriors dashed into the obstruction,
brandishing spears and clubs, and screaming like maniacs. Kingswell
uttered a low, quick cry, tossed his bag of powder into the glowing
coals under the feet of the enemy, and ran for the shelter of the
well-house at top speed. Tom Bent followed his movements on the instant.
Together they reached the narrow shelter; and, before they could turn
about, the air shook and reeled, as if a bolt of wind had broken upon
them, a blinding flash seemed to consume the whole night, and a puffing,
thumping report stunned their ears. They stumbled against the sides of
the shed, clawed desperately, and fell to the ground.

When Bernard Kingswell and the trusty boatswain regained their senses
(which had left them for only a few seconds), they crawled from the
well-house and stared about them. The square was not so bright as it had
been, and, save for a few huddled shapes on the snow, was empty. By the
shouting and mixed tumult, they knew that the fighting was now farther
away--that the settlers had sallied forth on the offensive. They could
not understand such recklessness; but they decided, without hesitation,
to take the risk. They ran to the now black gap in the palisades. Fire,
coals, wreckage, and even the snow had been hurled and blown broadcast.
They crossed the torn ground and headed for the tumult in the fitfully
illuminated spaces beyond. Native war-whoops and English shouts mixed
and clashed in the frosty air. On the very edge of the shifting
conflict, the old sailor clutched his master's arm. "Hark!" he cried.
"D'ye hear that now? It be the yell o' that young Ouenwa, sir, or ye can
call me a Dutcher!"

At the same moment, before Kingswell could reply to Bent's statement, a
club, thrown by a retreating warrior, caught the gentleman on the side
of the head and felled him like a thing of wood. He moaned, as he
toppled over. Then he lay still on the ruddy snow.


Beatrix had a dozen candles alight in the living-room of the baronet's
cabin. Word had reached her that Ouenwa and Black Feather had arrived in
time to take advantage of the rebuff dealt the enemy by the explosions
of the bags of powder. When victory had seemed to be hopelessly in the
hands of the determined savages, Ouenwa and his followers, though spent
from their journey, had made a timely and successful rear attack.

The girl was radiant. She moved up and down the room, eagerly awaiting
the return of Bernard Kingswell. She questioned herself as to that, and
laughed joyously. Yes, it was Bernard, beyond peradventure, whom heart,
hands, and lips longed to recover and reward. A month ago, a week ago,
it would have been her father--even a night ago he would have shared,
equally with the lover, in her sweet and eager concern. But now she sped
from hearth to door, and peered out into the blackness, with no thought
of any of those brave fellows save the lad of Bristol.

The burning brush had all been trampled out, and the fires in the walls
and stockade had been quenched with water. The little square was dark,
save for the subdued fingers of light from windows and doors. Beatrix
peered from the open door, regardless of the cold. She was outlined
black against the warm radiance inside the room. Her silken garments
clung about her, pressed gently by a breath of wind. She rested a hand
on either upright of the doorway, and leaned forward as if, at a whim,
she would fly out from the threshold. Presently shadowy figures took
shape in the gloom, and she heard her father's voice, and William
Trigget's, and the high pipe of Ouenwa. But she caught no sound of
Bernard Kingswell's clear tones. A sudden fear caught her, and she
stepped out upon the trampled snow and called to Sir Ralph. In a moment
he was at her side, and had an arm about her.

"Sweeting," he said, "you must stay within for a little. The night is
bitterly cold, and--"

"But where is Bernard?" she whispered, staring past him.

"He is with the others," replied the baronet,--"with Ouenwa and his
brave fellows, and the dauntless Trigget."

He spoke quickly and uneasily, and led her back to the cabin at the same
time. He closed the door, and laid a wet sword across a stool.

"What is it?" she cried, facing him, with wide eyes and bloodless
cheeks. "Tell me! Tell me!"

"The lad is hurt," admitted Sir Ralph.

"Hurt?" repeated the girl, vaguely. "Hurt? How should he be hurt?"

She shivered, and gripped her hand desperately. Could it be that the
High God had been deaf to her prayers?

Sir Ralph's face went as pale as hers; for all he knew of Kingswell's
condition was that he still breathed, and that his hat had saved his
head from being cut. Whether the skull was broken or not, he did not
know. He braced himself, and smiled.

"My dear," he said, "he is not seriously hurt, so do not stand like
that--for God's sake!"

At the last words his voice lost its note of composure, and broke
shrilly. He caught her to him. "Rip me," he cried, "but if you act so
when he is simply knocked over, what will you do if he ever gets a real
wound!"

The girl was comforted. Tears sprang to her eyes, and the blood returned
to her cheeks. She clung to the baronet and sobbed against his shoulder.
Presently she looked up.

"Take me to him," she begged, "or bring him here."

"So you love this Bernard Kingswell?" inquired her father, looking
steadily into her face.

Her gleaming eyes did not waver from his gaze. "Yes," she replied,
quietly.

The man turned away, took his blood-wet sword from the stool, eyed it
dully, and leaned it against the wall. He was trying to imagine what the
lad's death would mean to his daughter's future; but he could only see
that it would mean a few more years for himself. He started guiltily,
and returned to his daughter. His face was desperately grim.

"Wait for me," he said. "I'll see how the lad is doing now; and shall
return immediately."

Sir Ralph crossed to the cottage that had been built for D'Antons, and
which had passed on to Kingswell. He opened the door softly and stepped
within. He found the wounded gentleman lying prone on his couch,
half-undressed, and with bandaged head. Ouenwa, gaunt and blood-stained,
was beside the still figure.

"He opened his eyes," whispered the boy; "but see, he has closed them
again. His spirit waits at the spreading of the trails."

Sir Ralph bent down and examined the linen dressings on Kingswell's
head. They were exceedingly well arranged. He saw that the hair had been
cut away from the place of the wound.

"Your work, Ouenwa?" he inquired.

The boy nodded. The baronet felt his friend's pulse.

"It beats strong," he said. "The heart seems sure enough of the path to
take."

Ouenwa's face lighted quickly. "He has chosen," he said, gravely. "He
has seen the hunting-grounds shining beyond the west, but the beauty of
them has not lured him along that trail."

The baronet smiled quickly into the Beothic's eyes. "You are a brave
lad, and we are deep in debt to you," he exclaimed. "Your bravery and
wit have saved the fort and all our lives. Watch your friend a few
minutes longer; I but go to bring another nurse to help you. Then you
may sleep."




CHAPTER XXV.

FATE DEALS CARDS OF BOTH COLOURS IN THE LITTLE FORT


From that brisk fight, in which Ouenwa and his twenty braves and the
little garrison of Fort Beatrix defeated Panounia, Black Feather brought
a confirmation of Pierre d'Antons' concern in the last attacks upon the
settlement. It consisted of a sword-belt and an empty scabbard. He had
torn them from the person of a tall antagonist during a brief
hand-to-hand encounter. The owner of the gear had won free, Black
Feather regretted to say. Sir Ralph, too, felt the escape of his enemy,
and sincerely hoped that the defeat had ended his power over Panounia,
and brought down that wolfish chief's hatred instead.

On the morning after the battle, the little plantation presented a busy
though sombre appearance to those of its people who were in condition to
view it. Along the woods and rising ground to the north, the snow and
frozen soil were being hollowed to receive the bodies of those slain in
the fight. The dead of the enemy had been carried far into the woods,
and piled together with scant ceremony. The settlers had lost three of
their number,--young Donnelly, Harding, and the younger Trigget. Four of
the rescuing party were dead and wounded. Tom Bent was on his back
again, and Kingswell's head was ringing like a sea-shell. William
Trigget was cut about the face and sore all over; but he kept on his
feet.

After the graves were chipped in the iron earth, and the shrouded bodies
lowered therein and covered, the tribesmen, under Black Feather's
orders, set about building themselves lodges outside the stockade. It
had been decided that, for mutual support, the friendly Beothics should
camp near the fort, at least for the remainder of the winter. With axes
borrowed from the settlement, they soon had the forest ringing with the
noise of their labour. Though they had travelled light, in their hurry
to rescue the friends of Ouenwa and Black Feather, they had dragged
along with them a few sled-loads of deerskins and birch bark, with which
to cover their wigwams. So the shelters sprang up quickly about the torn
and scorched palisades; for it was a small matter to trim the poles and
fit the pliable roofs across the conical frames.

The dusk gathered over the wilderness, dimming the edges of white
barren and black forest and round hill. The stars shone silver above,
and the fires of the victorious men of the totem of the Bear glowed red
below. In the outer room of the cabin that had been Pierre d'Antons',
Beatrix sat alone by Kingswell's bed. Her eyes were on the leaping
flames in the chimney, and his were on the fair lines of her averted
face. The top of his head was so swathed in bandages that he looked like
a turbaned Turk. Cheeks and chin were white as paper in the unstable
light. His eyes were bright with a touch of fever brought on by his
suffering. His mind was in a fitful mood, for a minute or two steady
enough and concerned with the present and the room in which he lay, and
then wandering abroad, exploring vague trails of remembrance and
imagining. Sometimes he murmured words and sentences, but in such a
gabbling style that his nurse could have made nothing of what was
passing in his brain even if she had taken such advantage of his
condition as to try.

After a long spell of uneasy mutterings, followed by a profound silence,
he suddenly flung out one arm. The movement startled Beatrix from her
dreaming, and she turned her face back to him from the fire.

"Twenty days without water," he whispered, distinctly. "Twenty
days--and that beast Trowley is laughing to see my tongue between my
teeth like a squeezed rag."

The girl caught up a mug of water and held it to his lips. He drank
greedily, and then took hold of her hand. His head was against the
hollow of her arm; for, to give him the drink, she had knelt beside his
low bed.

"Beatrix," he said, gravely, "let us pretend that you love me."

She was strangely moved at that, and bent closer to see his eyes.

"Why pretend, dear heart?" she answered. "I do love you, as you very
well know. Sleep again, Bernard, with your head so--pressed close."

"I feel your heart," he said, simply as a child. The fever was as a fine
haze across the mirror of his brain.

"It beats only for you," she murmured, pressing her lips to his cheek.
The lad's eyes shone with a clearer light at that.

"Tell me that this is no vision of fever," he said. "Tell me, or
strength will bring nothing but sorrow. Better death than to find your
kisses a trick of dreaming."

"Is it not a pleasant dream?" she asked, softly, smiling a little.

"Ay; to dream so, a man would gladly have done with waking," he replied.
"If it were not in life that Beatrix were mine, then would I follow the
vision through eternal sleep--as God is my judge."

"Hush, dear lad," she murmured, "for the heart and the body of Beatrix
are of right Somersetshire stuff, to fade not at any whim of fever--and
the love she gives you will outlast life--as God is our judge and love
His handiwork." And she kissed him again, blushing sweetly at her
daring. And so they remained, she kneeling beside the couch, and he with
his bandaged head against her lovely shoulder, until Sir Ralph entered
the cabin, fumbling discreetly at the latch.

The days passed slowly in the heart of that frozen wilderness between
the white river and the long graves. Stockade and wall were repaired.
Fresh meat was trapped and shot in sheltered valley and rough wood. The
forge rang again with the clanging of sledges, and the tracts of timber
with the swinging axes. Hope reawoke in hearts long dismayed, and blood
ran more redly to the stir of work and freedom. Master Kingswell gained
fresh strength with the rounding of every day, and Mistress Westleigh
recovered all her glory of eyes and lips and hair. Ouenwa, honoured by
all, carried himself like a gentleman and a warrior. Black Feather, with
his wife and his surviving child in a snug lodge, felt again the zest
and peace of living. Only Sir Ralph seemed to find no ray of comfort in
the days of security. He brooded alone, avoiding even his daughter. His
face grew thinner, and his shoulders lost something of their youthful
vigour. The desolation and bitterness had, at last, dimmed his courage
and his philosophy. The very relief at Panounia's defeat and D'Antons'
supposed overthrow had, somehow, weakened his gallant endurance. He
counted it a grievance that God had not led him to his death in the last
fight, as he had prayed so earnestly. He had been eager then. Now he
must plan it over again--over and over--in cold reasoning and cold
blood, and alone by the fire. A foolish, causeless anger got hold upon
him at times; and again he would be all repentance, telling his heart
that, no matter how bitter his fate, it was fully deserved. And so, day
by day, the shadows grew behind his brain, and a little seed of madness
germinated and took root.

For a time Beatrix did not notice the change in her father's manner and
habits. The thing disclosed itself so gradually, and she was so intent
upon the nursing of her lover; and yet again, the baronet had been
variable in his moods, to a certain extent, ever since the beginning of
his troubles--years enough ago. It was Ouenwa who first saw that
something had gone radically wrong in the broken gentleman's mind, and
his knowledge had come about in this wise.

The young Beothic, though an ardent sportsman and warrior, was a still
more ardent seeker after bookish wisdom. Kingswell, before his hurt, had
taught him something of the art of reading. Later, Mistress Westleigh
had carried it further. By the time that Kingswell was safely on the
road to his old health and a mended head, Ouenwa could spell out a page
of English print very creditably. His primer was one of those volumes of
Master Will Shakespeare's plays, which the Frenchman had left behind
him. One day Beatrix entered the cabin to take her turn at tending the
invalid, and found Ouenwa with the drama in his hands, and his youthful
brow painfully furrowed with thought. She took the book from him and
fluttered the pages, pausing here and there to read a line or two.

"Run away," said she, "and on a shelf beside our chimney you will find a
book with easier words than this contains. There is matter here, I
think, that is beyond a beginner."

At that Kingswell raised himself to his elbow and nodded his sore head
eagerly.

"Ay, lad, run and find yourself an easier book," he said.

Nothing loath, for his quest of learning was sincere,--as was everything
about him,--Ouenwa left the presence of the lovers and ran across the
snow to Sir Ralph's cabin. He told his errand to the baronet. That
gentleman looked at him long and keenly, so that the boy trembled and
wished himself out of the house. Then, with a sudden start and a harsh
laugh, "Help yourself, lad," said Sir Ralph. Ouenwa found the shelf of
books, and, kneeling before it, was soon busy looking over the divers
volumes and broad-sheets with which it was piled high. He found a rhymed
and pictured chap-book greatly to his liking. He was spelling out the
first verses when a movement behind his back brought him to a sense of
his whereabouts. He turned quickly. There stood the baronet, with a
walking-cane in his hand, making lunge and thrust at a spot of resin on
the log wall. The poor gentleman stamped and straddled, pinked the
unseen swordsman, and parried the unseen blade, with a dashing air.
There was a light in his eyes and a twist of the lips that struck
Ouenwa's heart cold in his side. The light was that which, when seen in
the eyes of a man of a primitive people, divides that man from the laws
and responsibilities that are the portion of his fellows. It was the
gleam of idiocy--that sinister sheen that cuts a man from his
birthright.

The boy knelt there, motionless with fear, with his face turned over his
shoulder. He watched every movement of the fantastic exhibition with
fascinated eyes. He fairly held his breath, so terrible was the display
in that quiet, dim-lit room. Suddenly the baronet lowered the point of
the modish cane smartly to the floor, and turned upon the lad with a
smile, an embarrassed flush on his thin cheeks, and sane eyes.

"'Tis a pretty art--this of the French rapier," he said, "and I make a
point of keeping my wrist limber for it."

"Yes, sir," said Ouenwa.

Sir Ralph flung the walking-cane aside, and sat down despondently in the
nearest chair. Ouenwa saw, at a glance, that his presence was already
forgotten. With furtive movements and such haste as he could manage, he
began replacing some of the books and selecting others to carry away
with him.

"Sweeting," said the baronet, "a pipe of tobacco would rest me."

Ouenwa realized that the gentleman, in his strange mood, believed that
Mistress Beatrix was in the room; but Ouenwa had tact enough not to
point out the little mistake. He got up noiselessly and filled the bowl
of a long pipe from a great jar on the chimney-piece. He took a splinter
of wood from the basket by the hearth and lit it at the fire. Stepping
softly to the baronet's side, he placed the pipe in his hand, and held
the light to the tobacco while the baronet puffed reflectively and
unseeingly. Then the lad gathered up his books and left the cabin. Fear
of Sir Ralph's wild manner was cold in his veins.




CHAPTER XXVI.

PIERRE D'ANTONS PARRIES ANOTHER THRUST


And now to tell something of the movements of Pierre d'Antons, which, of
late, have been carried on behind the screen of the forest and beyond
the ken of the reader.

The defeat of Panounia's warriors, on that night of fire and blood,
knocked the adventurer's fortunes flatter than they had ever been. You
may believe that he cursed Ouenwa bitterly, and wished that he had
killed him long ago, when the lad threw his followers into the battle.
It was then that D'Antons himself left his post beyond the scuffle, and,
with desperate efforts, tried to turn the reverse back to victory. His
swordsmanship and energy availed him nothing. He missed capture only by
slipping the buckle of his sword-belt. Then, a fugitive from both sides,
he ran to the woods, avoiding the scattered and retreating warriors who
had so lately been struggling in his behalf as fearfully as he would
have avoided William Trigget or Sir Ralph Westleigh. One of his late
comrades, trailing wounded limbs along the snow, hurled a Beothic curse
after him. Another, better prepared, let fly a war-club, and missed him
by an inch. He slashed on, through the underbrush, the drifts, and the
dark, sure that capture by any of the defeated savages would mean death
and perhaps torture.

The black captain did not run on any vague course, despite his haste. He
knew where a possibility of help awaited him. He had given his wits to
more than plans of revenge and kidnapping during his sojourn with
Panounia. In winning the men to him, he knew that his hold upon them
would not outlast defeat; but in winning the love of the Beothic maiden
Miwandi, he had laid up store against an evil day. But he had not won
her heart simply on a chance of defeat--far from it, for he had not
dreamed of such a chance. It was a pleasant thing in itself to be the
lover of that nut-brown, lithe-limbed, warm-hearted young girl--for
Miwandi suspected nothing of his desire for, and plans concerning, the
lady in the fort. She loved the tall foreigner quickly and surely. She
was extravagantly proud of his power over the warriors of her people. He
was her brave, and as such she cherished him openly, to the envy rather
than the criticism of the other women of the encampment.

Miwandi was the daughter of a lesser chief of Panounia's faction. She
was seventeen years of age. Her skin was ruddy brown, darker than the
skins of some of her people and lighter than that of others. Her hair
was brown and of a silken texture, very unlike the straight locks of the
savages of the great continent to the westward. Her features were good,
and her eyes were full of life and warmth. D'Antons' conquest rankled in
the breasts of more than one of the young bucks of the camp.

Pierre d'Antons, fleeing from the fighting men of both parties, shaped
his course for the lodge in which Miwandi dwelt. As he ran, with fear at
his heels, he forgot to regret the girl in the fort; instead, a pang of
honest affection for the comely young woman toward whom he was flying
for help stirred in him. He stumbled into the lodge, and Miwandi caught
him in her arms. In a few quick words, he told her of the defeat, and of
the anger of Panounia's warriors toward him. She kissed him once,
passionately, and then fell to collecting a few things--a quiver of
arrows, a bow, furs, and some food. She pressed a bundle into his arms.
He accepted it without a word. She bound her snow-shoes to her feet, and
retied the wrenched thongs of his. Then they slipped from the dark
lodge to the darker woods; and his sheathless sword, damp with blood,
was still in his hand. They heard the cries of the wounded behind them,
and other cries that inspired them to flight.

They fled for hours, without pausing to ease their breathing. Of the
two, it was the man who sometimes lagged, who often stumbled, and who
cried once that he would rather be captured than strain limb and lung to
another effort. D'Antons had been actively employed throughout the day,
and again during the most desperate passages of the battle, and his
strength was well-nigh exhausted. At last he fell and lay prone. In an
instant the girl was beside him, pillowing his head and shielding his
body from the cold, and revived him with brandy from the scanty supply
in his flask. By that time the dawn was breaking gray under the stars,
and all sounds of the chase had died away. She cut an armful of
fir-branches, and with them and the skins she and D'Antons had carried,
she made a rude bed and a yet ruder shelter. So they lay until high
noon, fugitives in a desolate wilderness, with death, in half a dozen
guises, lurking on either hand.

Behind D'Antons and Miwandi, the broken band of Panounia's followers
soon gave up the hunt. Matters were not in condition to be mended by
killing a long-faced Frenchman and a pretty girl. The defeated savages
had their own wounds to see to, and already too many dead to hide under
the snow. A matter of sentiment, like the torturing and killing of their
false leader D'Antons, would have to wait. Now, of all those valorous
warriors who had menaced the little fort since the very beginning of
winter, only ten remained unhurt. Panounia was dead. He had breathed his
last in the edge of the woods, while the battle was still raging, and
had been carried farther in by one of his men. Thus his death had
remained unknown to the victors; as had also the deaths of many more of
the besiegers. Wolf Slayer, that courageous savage lad who had once
boasted of his deeds to Ouenwa, was desperately hurt. Painfully and
hopelessly, those of the wounded who could move at all, the women, and
the unhurt of the band, retreated toward farther and surer fastnesses.
The wounded who could not drag themselves along were left to perish in
the snow. Some were frozen stiff before morning. Some bled to death
within the same time. A few lived until they were discovered by Ouenwa's
men in the bright daytime,--they were reported as having been found
dead.

D'Antons and Miwandi travelled, by forced marches, until they reached a
wooded valley and a narrow, frozen river. Along this they journeyed
inland and southward. At last they found a spot that promised shelter
from the bleak winds as well as from prying eyes. There they built a
wigwam of such materials as were at hand. Game was fairly plentiful in
the protected coverts around. They soon had a comfortable retreat
fashioned in that safe and voiceless place.

"It will do until summer brings the ships," remarked D'Antons, busy with
plans whereby he might give Dame Fortune's wheel another twirl.
Sometimes he spent whole hours in telling Miwandi brave tales of far and
beautiful countries. He spoke of white towns above green harbours, of
high forests with strange, bright birds flying through their tops, and
of wide savannahs, whereon roved herds of great, sharp-horned beasts of
more weight than a stag caribou.

"Oh, but you do not mean to leave me, Heart-of-Life," she cried.

So he swore, by a dozen saints, that she, Miwandi, should be his queen
in a palace of white stone above a tropic sea.




CHAPTER XXVII.

A GRIM TURN OF MARCH MADNESS


Day by day, Sir Ralph Westleigh's mental sickness increased. It
strengthened in the dark, like a blight on corn. Very gradually, and day
by day, it grew over the bright surface of his mind and spirit. The
sureness of its advance was a fearful thing to watch.

By the time March was over the wilderness, with a hint of spring in the
morning skies, the baronet's condition was noticeable to even the
dullest inmate of the settlement. The poor gentleman spoke little--and
that little was seldom to the point. It seemed as if he had forgotten
how to smile, or even to make a pretence at mirth. He walked alone for
hours on the frozen river and through the woods. The Beothics of the
camp before the fort stood in awe of him. At times he treated Beatrix
and Bernard Kingswell as strangers; but he always knew Maggie Stone, and
chided her often on the scantiness of his dinners. All day, indoors and
out, he wore a rapier at his side. In the cabin he spent half of the
time inert by the fire, without book, or cards, or chess, and the rest
of it in sword-play with an imaginary antagonist.

It was well for Beatrix that she had found Bernard's love before the
fresh misfortune descended upon her. But even with that comfort and
inspiration, her father's derangement affected her bitterly. They had
been such friends; and now he had blank eyes and deaf ears for all her
actions and words. It was twenty times harder for her than to have seen
him struck down by knife or arrow. Death seemed an honest thing compared
to that coldness and vagueness of spirit that gathered more thickly
about him with the passing of each day. It was as if another life,
another spirit, had taken possession of the familiar body and beloved
features. After two weeks neither her kisses nor her tears had any
potency to break through the awful estrangement. Her prayers, her fond
recollections of their old companionship, brought no gleam to the dull
eye.

By the end of March the busy boat-builders and smiths of the
settlement--and every man save Sir Ralph was either one or the
other--had two new boats all but completed. They were staunch crafts,
of about the capacity and model of the _Pelican_. They were intended for
fishing on the river and the great bays and for exploration cruises.

William Trigget, who was a master shipbuilder as he was a master
mariner, entertained great ideas of fishing and trading more openly than
Sir Ralph had sanctioned in the past. He was for carving out a real home
in the wilderness, and his wife was of the same mind.

"We couldn't bear to leave the boy's grave," he said.

Kingswell promised that, should he win back to Bristol, and find his
affairs in order, he would use his influence in behalf of the settlement
on Gray Goose River. Donnelly, too, was all for holding to the new land.

"It be rough, God knows," he said, "but it be sort o' hopeful, too. If
they danged savages leaves us alone, an' trade's decent, I be for
spendin' the balance o' my days alongside o' Skipper Trigget. There be a
grave yonder the missus an' me wouldn't turn our backs on, not if we
could help it."

Kingswell himself was not building any dreams of fixing his lot in that
desolate place; and neither was old Tom Bent, though he spoke little on
the subject. Ouenwa's ambitions continued to point overseas. Beatrix,
now despondent at her father's trouble, and again happy in her love,
gave little thought to the future of the settlement, or to any plans for
the days to come, save vague dreamings of an English home.

March wore along, and in open spaces the snow shrank inch by inch. Then
rain fell; and after that a time of tingling cold held all the
wilderness in a ringing white imprisonment. A man could run over the
snow-fields and the bed of the river without snow-shoes; for the surface
was tough as wood, white as the shield of that sinless knight, Sir
Galahad, and glistening as a thousand diamonds. The mornings lifted
clear silver and pale gold along the east. The evenings faded out in
crimson and saffron, and the twilights, even when the stars were lit,
made of the dome of heaven a bubble of thinnest green. And back of it
all, despite the frost, hung a suggestion of sap-reddened twigs and
blossoming trees.

The lure of the season touched every one in the fort, and the camp
beside it. It ran in Sir Ralph's blood like some fabled wine--for what
vintage of France or Spain is the stuff of which the poets sing. It
mounted to his head with a high, unregretting recklessness, and doubled
the madness that already lurked there. Something of his old manner
returned, and for a whole evening he sat with Beatrix and Kingswell and
talked rationally and hopefully. Also, that same night, he played a game
of chess. He spoke of the future as one who sees into it clearly and
without fear. He recalled the past without any sign of embarrassment.
But Kingswell, meeting his eyes by chance, caught a light of derision in
them.

Very early in the morning, while the stars still glinted overhead, and
the promise of day was no more than a strip of pearl along the east, Sir
Ralph Westleigh unbarred the door of his cabin and slipped out. He was
warmly and carefully dressed in furs and moccasins. He carried his sword
free under his arm. Very cautiously he scaled the palisade and dropped
to the frozen crust of snow outside. The Beothic encampment lay around
the corner of the fort, so he was safe from detection from that quarter.
He looked about and behind with a cunning smile. Then he ran lightly
into the woods.

Sir Ralph followed his aimless course for miles, and his soft-shod feet
left no mark on the hard surface of the snow. Then the sun slid up and
over, and in the warmth of high noon the frozen crust of the wilderness
thawed a little, and here and there the baronet's feet broke through. At
that he began to feel fatigue and a disconcerting pang of doubt. He
flung himself down in a little thicket of spruces, and called for Maggie
Stone to bring him food and drink. He called again and again. He shouted
other names than that of the old servant. In a sudden agony of fear, he
jumped to his feet and plunged through the evergreens. At every third
step he sank to his knee, or half-way up his thigh. He screamed the name
of his daughter, "Beatrix, Beatrix"--or was it his dead wife he was
calling? He cried for guidance to many great gentlemen of England who
had been his boon companions in the old days, forgetting that death had
taken some of them away from him, and that the rest, to a man, had
turned of their own accord. Presently he ceased his foolish outcry and
plodded along, with no thought of the course, sobbing the while like a
lost child.

The sun began its downward journey, and still the baronet, with his
sheathed sword under his arm, staggered across the voiceless wilderness.
Toward mid-afternoon the thawing crust froze again, and he travelled
with less difficulty. Ever and anon his poor eyes pictured a running
figure in an edge of blue shadow before him. At times it was the figure
of the nobleman he had killed in England, in the dispute at the
gaming-table, and again it was a friend,--Kingswell or Trigget, or
another of the fort,--and yet again it was Pierre d'Antons. But no
matter how he strove to run down the lurker, he lost him every time.
Thirst plagued him, and he ate the clear ice and snow off the fronds of
the spruces. Hunger gnawed him awhile, but passed gradually. The west
took on the flame and glory of sunset. The east darkened. The stars
pricked through the high shell of the sky. Night gathered her cloudless
darkness over the wilderness; and still the demented baronet followed
his aimless quest.

Toward evening of the day following Sir Ralph Westleigh's departure from
Fort Beatrix, Pierre d'Antons and Miwandi were startled by the sudden
and noiseless appearance of a gaunt and wild-eyed person in the doorway
of their lodge. The woman cried out, and ran to the farthest corner of
the wigwam. D'Antons staggered back, and his face turned gray as the
ashes around the fire-stone. The unexpected visitor drew his blade,
flung the sheath behind him on the snow, and advanced upon the fugitive
adventurer. D'Antons sprang back and caught up his own sword from where
it lay on a couch of branches and skins. He swore, more in wonder than
anger.

"Westleigh!" he cried. "What brings you here, you fool--and how many
follow you?"

The baronet halted and glanced quickly over his shoulder. He reeled a
little, but his eyes changed in their light and colour.

"I am alone," he said. "Yes, I am alone." His voice was quiet. He seemed
sorely puzzled. D'Antons' face regained its swarthy tints, and he
laughed harshly.

"So you have hunted me down, old cock," he said, smiling. "You'll find
that the quarry has fangs--in his own den."

The red of madness returned to Sir Ralph's eyes. He advanced his rapier.
In a second the fight was on. For a few minutes the strength of insanity
supported the baronet's starving muscles and reeling brain. Then his
thrusts began to go wide, and his guard to waver. A clean lunge dropped
him in the door of the lodge without a cry. The life-blood of the last
baronet of Beverly and Randon made a vivid circle of red on the snow of
that nameless wilderness.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE RUNNING OF THE ICE


It was Beatrix who first discovered her father's flight; but that was
four hours after its occurrence. The fort was soon astir with the news.
Men set out in all directions, in search of the missing one. Half a
dozen of the friendly Beothics joined in the hunt. They went east and
west, north and south. The sharpest eyes could detect no trail of the
madman's feet. Beatrix insisted upon accompanying Bernard and Ouenwa.
She tried to show a brave face; but something in her heart told her to
expect the worst. The three travelled southward, and shortly before
sunset returned to the fort, unsuccessful. They found that all the other
searchers had got back, save Black Feather and a young brave named
Kakatoc, who had set out together.

By the merest chance Black Feather and his companion happened upon the
place where the baronet had first broken through the melting crust. With
but little effort they found where he had rested and taken up his
journey again. Farther on, the faintness of the trail put an edge to
their determination to find the unfortunate gentleman. It was a
challenge to their woodcraft, and they accepted it eagerly. But within
two hours of finding the marks, they lost them again. They ranged wide;
and at last Black Feather discovered a footprint in a little pad of snow
beside a stunted spruce. In several places the branches of the tree
showed where the snow had been broken away, as if by a man's hand. It
was enough to keep them to the quest.

Not in the next day, but in the early morning after that, the two
Beothics happened upon a sheltered valley and a snow-cleared space, with
a fire-stone in the middle of it, where a lodge had lately stood. As for
signs of blood, there were none. Snow had been deftly spread and
trampled over it. All around the so evident site of a human habitation
the hard crust gleamed unbroken, save for a little path that ran down to
a hole in the ice of the stream. After considering the place, and
shaking their heads, the two ate the last of the food they had in their
pouches and turned their feet back to the fort. They passed within a few
paces of a dense thicket, in the heart of which the baronet's body lay
uncovered. But how were they to know it, when even the prowling foxes
had not yet found it out!

For several days the search was continued by the settlers and their
allies, but all in vain. It was not even suspected that the deserted
camping-place which Black Feather and Kakatoc had seen had so lately
been warmed by the feet of Pierre d'Antons and the blood of the lost
baronet. For a few days longer the business of the settlement lagged,
and the place wore an air of mourning, despite the ever-brightening and
mellowing season. Then the axes struck up their chant again, and the
little duties of the common day erased the forebodings of Eternity from
the minds of the pioneers. Only Mistress Beatrix could see nothing of
the reawakening of life and hope for the sorrow in her heart and the
mist across her eyes. She had loved her father deeply and faithfully,
with a love that had been strengthened by his misfortunes. She had felt
toward him the combined affections of daughter and sister and friend.
She had made allowances for the weaknesses of his later years that
equalled the ever charitable devotion of a parent for a best-loved
child. She had not been, and was not now, blind to the passion of gaming
that had forced him to exile and an unknown death; but she had forgiven
it long ago. As to the alleged murder that had made such an evil odour
in London, she believed--and rightly--that hot blood and overmuch wine
had been to blame, and that her father's sword had been drawn after the
victim's.

Bernard Kingswell did all in his power to comfort the bereaved girl. He
urged her to spend much of her time out-of-doors. He told his plans for
their future, and to cheer her he built them even more hopefully than he
felt; for he realized that many difficulties were yet to be overcome
before Bristol was safely reached. With Ouenwa, the two often went on
long tramps through the woods. Their evenings were always spent
together. Sometimes he read aloud to her, and sometimes they played at
chess. One evening she got her violin, and played as wonderfully as she
had on that other occasion; but instead of leaving him afterward without
a word, as she had done, she laid the fiddle aside and nestled into his
arms. He held her tenderly, patting the bright hair against his
shoulder, and murmuring broken assurances of his love and sympathy. She
wept quietly for a little while; but when she kissed him at the door,
her face and eyes shone with something of their old light.

By mid-April knobs of rock and moss pierced through the shrinking snow
in the open places; but in the woods the drifts continued to withstand
the wasting breath of the spring winds. Gray Goose River was no longer
a broad path of spotless white. Its surface was mottled with patches of
sodden gray; and an attentive listener on the bank might hear a myriad
of tiny voices, some sibilant and some tinkling and liquid, in and under
the enfeebled ice. Up and down the valley, between the knolls and wooded
hills, the little streams were already snarling and roaring, and here
and there flashing brown shoulders to the sunlight. Through all the
wilderness ran a tingling whisper; and twilight, midnight, and dawn were
stirred by the falling cries of wild-fowl on the wing. A faint, alluring
fragrance was in the air--the scent of millions of swelling buds and
crimson willow-stems.

About that time three warriors of the following of the dead Panounia
arrived at the fort, with prayers for peace on their lips and gifts in
their hands. They were received by Kingswell, William Trigget, and
Ouenwa from the fort, and Black Feather and two of his chiefs from the
camp. A lengthy business was gone through with, and much strong
Virginian tobacco was burned. Documents were written in English and in
the picture-writing of the natives, and read aloud, by Ouenwa, in both
languages. Then they were solemnly signed by all present, and peace was
restored to the great tribe of the North, and protection, trade, and
lands were granted for all time to the inhabitants of Fort Beatrix and
their descendants. The three visitors went back to their people with
rolls of red cloth and packets of glass beads, pot-metal knives, and
other useless trinkets on their shoulders.

Shortly after their departure from the fort, a storm of rain blew up
from the sou'east. All day the great drops thumped on the roofs of the
cabins, on the skies of the lodges, and spattered on the sodden snow.
The firs and spruces gleamed clean and black under the drenching
showers. A veil of smoke-gray mist lay above the farther woods and along
the black tangles of alders and gray fringes of willows. All night the
warm rain continued to fall and drift. When morning lifted along the
pearly east, a cry rang from the camp to the fort that the ice in the
river was moving. The settlers hastened to the flat before the stockade.
Beatrix was with them.

"See how the torn edge of ice overtops the bank," said Kingswell,
pointing eagerly. "And there is an open space. Ah, it has closed again!
How slowly it grinds along!"

"It will run faster before night," replied the girl, and Ouenwa, who was
versed in the ways of his northern rivers, nodded silently.

While they watched, admiring the swelling, swinging, ponderous advance
of the great surface, and harkening to the booming thunder of its agony
that filled the air, a breathless runner joined the group and spoke a
few quick words to Black Feather. That chief approached Ouenwa and
whispered in his ear. The boy glanced quickly at Beatrix and Kingswell,
and then questioned Black Feather anxiously. Presently he turned back to
the lovers.

"The ice is stuck down-stream," he said. "Blue Cloud has seen it. He
fears that the water will rise over the flat--and the fort."

The river continued to rise until evening. After that the waters
subsided a little, great cakes of rotten ice hung stranded along the
crest of the bank, and the main body ceased to run downward. But from up
the valley the thunder of a hidden disturbance still boomed across the
windless air.

"The jam had broken down-stream," said Ouenwa.

Kingswell, unused to the ways of running ice, was satisfied, and retired
to his couch with an easy mind. He slept soundly until, in the gray of
the dawn, Ouenwa shook him roughly, and all but dragged him to the
floor.

"Wake up, wake up," cried the boy. "Damn, but you sleep like a bear!
The fort is in danger! We must run for higher land."

"Rip me!" exclaimed Kingswell, springing to his feet, "but what is the
trouble? Are we attacked?"

"The river is all but empty of water," replied Ouenwa. "The ice sags in
the channel, like an empty garment. The water hangs above, behind the
third point where we cut the timber for the boats."

Kingswell, all the while, was busily employed pulling on his heavy
clothes. Though he did not fully understand the threatening danger, he
felt that it was real enough. While he tied the thongs of his deerhide
leggins, Ouenwa told him that warning had reached the fort but a few
minutes before.

"How?" inquired Kingswell, hurriedly bestowing a wallet of gold coins
and some other valuables about his person.

Ouenwa, already loaded down with his friend's possessions, threw open
the door and stepped out.

"Wolf Slayer brought it," he said, over his shoulder. "And I do not
understand," he added, "for Wolf Slayer hates us all."

The other, close at his heels, made no comment on that intelligence. He
scarcely heard it, so anxious was he for the safety of Mistress
Beatrix. The whole fort was astir; but Kingswell ran straight to his
sweetheart's door. It was opened by the maiden herself. She and the old
servant were all ready to leave.

An hour passed; load after load of stores and household goods was
carried to the low hills behind the fort; and still the river lay empty,
with its marred sheet of ice sagging between the banks; and still the
unseen jam held back the gathering freshet. The women wept at the
thought that their little homes were in danger of being broken and torn
and whirled away. But Beatrix was dry-eyed.

"It will be no great matter for them to build new cabins in a safer
place," she said to Kingswell.

He was looking at the natives dragging their rolled-up lodges to higher
ground. He turned, smiling gravely.

"You have no love for the wilderness?" he asked, "and yet but for this
forsaken place, you and I might never have met."

She laid her hand on his arm, and lifted a flushed face to his tender
regard.

"So it has served my turn," she said. "Now that I have you, I could well
spare these wastes of black wood and empty barren."

Kingswell had been waiting patiently and in silence for that confession
ever since their betrothal. Hitherto she had not once spoken with any
assurance of their future together. She had treated the subject vaguely,
as if her thoughts were all with the past and with the tragedy of her
father's death.

"Would you face the homeward voyage in one of the little boats?" he
asked, softly.

"Ay, with you at the tiller," she replied.

"Dear girl," he said, "I think that a stout ship called the _Heart of
the West_ will be setting sail from Bristol, for this wilderness, before
many days."

"Would the fellow dare return?" she asked; for she had heard the story
of Trowley's treachery.

"He will think himself safe enough," replied Kingswell. "No doubt he
owns the ship now--has bought it from my mother for the price of a
skiff, after telling her how recklessly he battled with the savages to
save her son's life."

He laughed softly. "The old rogue will be surprised when I step aboard,"
he added.

Before she could answer him a booming report shook the sunlit air. It
was followed, in a second, by a long-drawn tumult--a grinding and
crashing and roaring--as if the firmament had fallen and overthrown the
everlasting hills. The sagging ice below them reared, domed upward, and
split with clapping thunders. It broke its plunging masses, which were
hurled down the stream and over the flats. A thing of brown water and
sodden gray lumps tore the alders and swung across the meadow where the
Beothic encampment had stood an hour before. The eastern stockade of the
fort went down beneath its inevitable, crushing onslaught.

All day cakes and pans of sodden ice and snow raced down the river, and
the air hummed and vibrated with their clamour. But the weight of the
released waters had passed; and the fort had suffered by no more than an
exposed side.




CHAPTER XXIX.

WOLF SLAYER COMES AND GOES; AND TROWLEY RECEIVES A VISITOR


Wolf Slayer, who had brought warning of the menace of the freshet to
Fort Beatrix, soon showed his evil hand. He had arrived at the fort in a
starving condition and still weak from wounds received in the battle in
which his father had been killed. Had he been well and filled with meat,
he would undoubtedly have let the inmates of the fort and the camp lie
in ignorance of the danger. For ten days he was fed and cared for by the
settlers. By the end of that time, he felt himself again. The old
arrogance burned in his eyes; the old sneer returned to his lips. Ouenwa
read the signs and wondered how the deviltry would show itself under
such unpropitious circumstances.

Ouenwa's sleep was light and fitful on the tenth night after the
overflowing of the river. About midnight he awoke, turned over, and
could not get back to his dreams. So he lay wide-awake, thinking of the
future. He could hear Bernard Kingswell's peaceful breathing. He thought
of his friend, and his heart warmed to him with gratitude and
comrade-love. He thought of Beatrix, smiled wistfully in the darkness,
and put the bright vision away from him. What was that? He breathed more
softly and lifted his head. Was it fancy, or--or what? He shifted
noiselessly to the farther edge of the couch. A hand brushed along his
pillow of folded blanket. Next moment he gripped an unseen wrist and
closed with a silent enemy.

Minutes passed before the wrestlers stumbled against a stool, with a
clatter that startled Kingswell to his feet. The Englishman leaped to
the hearth, kicked the fallen coals to life, and threw a roll of birch
bark on top of them. Then he stepped aside until the yellow flame
lighted the room. The illumination was just in time, for Wolf Slayer had
the lighter boy on the floor and the knife raised, when Kingswell saw
his way to the rescue. He recognized the youth, and in a fit of English
indignation at such a return for hospitality caught him by neck and belt
and hurled him bodily from the prostrate Ouenwa. Wolf Slayer alighted on
his feet, snatched open the door (which he had left ajar), and fled into
the darkness.

A morning of late May brought a friendly native to Fort Beatrix, with
word that three English ships were in Wigwam Harbour. Then Ouenwa and
Tom Bent made the journey and returned, in due season, with the welcome
news that one of the vessels was the _Heart of the West_.

Both the new boats and the old _Pelican_ were made ready for the
expedition. Kingswell commanded the _Pelican_, with Ouenwa and six
natives for crew. Tom Bent was put in charge of the second boat, and
Black Feather of the third. William Trigget and Donnelly were left to
see that no harm came to Mistress Westleigh--and, as the boats stole
down-stream, in the gray of the dawn, William Trigget treasured in his
hand a duly witnessed document, in which Bernard Kingswell, gentleman,
of Bristol, bequeathed and willed all his earthly goods to Beatrix
Westleigh, spinster, of Fort Beatrix, in the Newfounde Land, and late of
Beverly and Randon, in Somersetshire, England.

The parting between Beatrix and her lover had been a fond one, but the
man had noticed (and in his heart regretted) the fortitude with which
she bade him farewell and godspeed. He worried about it in his sleep,
and again, as he looked longingly at her cabin in the bleak dawn. He
tried to comfort himself with memories of a hundred incidents that
placed the sincerity of her love beyond a shadow of doubt. But, for all
that, she might have shed a few tears. Surely she realized the chances
of danger?--the risk he was running, for her sake? Love is edged and
barbed by just such little and unreasonable questionings.

A white mist wreathed along the surface of Gray Goose River when the
three boats swung down with the current. The Beothics were armed with
English knives. There were no firearms aboard any of the little vessels.
Kingswell and Ouenwa had swords at their belts, and Spanish daggers for
their left hands. Tom Bent was armed with his oft-proved cutlass.

The sun did not get above the horizon until the little fleet was clear
of the river's mouth. There a breath of wind sighed through the cordage,
and the sails flapped up and rounded softly. Kingswell leaned forward
and looked under the square canvas of the _Pelican's_ big wing.

"An extra man," he remarked to Ouenwa, sharply. "Who has taken it upon
himself to improve on my orders?"

A blanket-swathed figure, forward of the mast, turned and crawled aft.
Then the blanket fell away, and Mistress Westleigh, rigged out in an
amazing mixture of masculine and feminine attire, laughed up at the
commander.

"Promise to shield me from the wrath of Maggie Stone, when we go back,"
she whispered, in mock concern.

For a moment Bernard stared, with wonder and embarrassment in his eyes,
the while Ouenwa hid a smile. Then he doffed his hat and caught the
queer figure to his knee; and in the flush of the morning, under the
grave regard of the Beothic warriors, he kissed her on lips and brow.

"What authority has Maggie Stone?" he cried. "If any one has a right to
control your actions, surely it is I."

She slipped to the seat beside him. "And you told me I could not
accompany you--that it would not be safe," she replied.

"Ay, but it was my duty to bid you remain behind," he said. "God knows
it hurt me to refuse your so--so flattering a wish. But you accepted it
calmly, dear heart."

"I accepted it for what it was worth," she laughed. "I could not shed
tears over a parting which I felt certain was not to take place." Her
face changed quickly from merriment to gravity. "I could not have stayed
in the fort without you," she whispered. "Dear lad, I am afraid to
death whenever you are out of my sight. I do believe this love has made
a coward of me!"

For a little while there was no sound aboard the _Pelican_ save the
tapping of the reef-points on the swelling breast of the sail, and the
slow creak of the tiller. Ouenwa, leaning far to one side, gazed ahead,
while the warriors crouched on the thwarts. Then the man stooped his
head close to the girl's.

"But on this trip," he whispered, "you must obey me--for both our sakes,
dearest. It would be mutiny else."

"I shall always obey you," she replied--"always, always--so long as you
do not again leave me alone in Fort Beatrix."

"William Trigget was there," he ventured. "And Maggie Stone."

She laughed at that. "Poor Maggie!" she sighed. "Poor Maggie! She will
rate me soundly for my boldness. She has ever a thousand discourses on
the proprieties ready on the tip of her tongue."

"Ah, the proprieties," murmured Bernard, as if caught by a new and
somewhat disconcerting idea. "Rip me, but I've never given them a
thought!"

Beatrix laughed delightedly. "You must not let them trouble you now,"
she said. "When we get back to Bristol, I will guard myself with a
dozen staid companions, and--" She paused, and blushed crimson. "I
forget that I am penniless," she added.

Kingswell's left hand closed over hers where it lay in her lap. "How
long, think you, shall you stand in need of chaperons in Bristol?" he
asked.

The three boats sought shelter in a tiny, hidden bay, and Kingswell,
Mistress Westleigh, Ouenwa, and Tom Bent made an overland trip to a
wooded hill overlooking Wigwam Harbour. There lay the _Heart of the
West_, close in at her old anchorage after the day's fishing. Work was
going briskly forward on the stages at the edge of the tide. The other
vessels, which were much smaller than Trowley's command, lay nearer the
mouth of the river harbour. The declining sun stained spars and furled
sails to a rosy tint above the green water.

"Hark!" whispered Kingswell, touching the girl's arm, as she crouched
beside him in the fringe of spruces.

A bellowing voice, loud and harsh in abuse, reached their ears.

"'Tis Trowley," he said, and chuckled. "How will he sound to-night, I
wonder?"

"You will not be rash, Bernard,--for my sake," pleaded the girl.

He assured her that he would be discreet.

It was dark when they got back to the little cove in which the boats
were beached. About midnight, with no light save the vague illumination
of the scattered stars, they rowed out with muffled oars. They moved
with such caution that it took them two hours to reach Wigwam Harbour.
They passed the outer ships unchallenged. Then Beatrix was transferred
from the _Pelican_ to Black Feather's boat, and Tom Bent joined the
commander. A veil of drifting cloud shut out even such feeble light as
had disclosed the course to the voyagers. Before them the _Heart of the
West_ loomed dark, a thing of massed shadows and a few yellow lights.

The new-built boats lay about thirty yards aft and seaward of the ship.
The _Pelican_ stole in under the looming stern, with no more noise than
a fish makes when he breaches in shallow water. The crew steadied her
beside the groaning rudder with their hands. Kingswell stood on a thwart
and peered in at the cabin window, as Ouenwa had peered on a night of
the preceding season. The low, oak-ceiled room was empty. A lantern hung
from the starboard bulkhead, and two candles, in silver sticks that bore
the Kingswell crest, burned, with bending flames, on the table. On the
locker under the lantern lay a cutlass in its sheath, and a boat-cloak
in an untidy heap. The edge of the table was within two feet of the
square stern-window.

For a little while Kingswell listened with guarded breath. Then,
swiftly and lightly, he pulled himself across the ledge of the window,
scrambled through, and crouched behind the table. Very cautiously he
drew his rapier with his right hand and his dagger with his left. For a
minute or two he squatted in the narrow quarters, breathing regularly
and deeply, and harkening to the innumerable creaking voices of the
decks and bulkheads, and the muffled voices and laughter from forward.
For the occasion he had donned the hat, coat, breeches, and boots--all
now stained and faded--in which Master Trowley had last seen him.

Suddenly a heavy, uncertain step sounded on the companion ladder just
forward of the cabin door. A volley of stout Devonshire oaths boomed
above the lesser sounds. The door flew open, smote the bulkhead with a
resounding crack, and swung, trembling. The bulky figure of Trowley
entered, and the heady voice of the old sea-dog cursed the door, and
big, red hands slammed it shut again. Kingswell drew a deep breath, and
composed his dancing nerves and galloping blood as best he could. His
emotions were disconcertingly mixed.

The masterful old pirate (for such he surely was, deny the charge if you
like) seemed to fill the cabin to overflowing with his lurching, great
body. He tossed boat-cloak and cutlass on the deck, and yanked up the
top of the locker. With muttered revilings at the excessive cost of West
Indies rum, he produced a bottle of no mean capacity from its
hiding-place, and a fine glass sparkled in the candle-light like
diamonds. Kingswell recognized the glass as one from which he had often
drunk his grog--a rare piece from his house in Bristol. Those articles
the mariner placed on the table, scarcely a foot from the watcher's
head. Next he loaded himself a china pipe with black tobacco, and lit it
at one of the candles. In doing so, Master Bernard heard the puffings
and gruntings with which the deed was accomplished, like half a gale in
his ear. At last the fellow sat down with a thud, squared his elbows on
the table, gazed for a second at the square window that opened on to the
mysterious gloom of the night, and tipped the bottle. The liquor gulped
and gurgled in its passage to the glass. The reek of it permeated the
air.

"Dang it," grumbled the mariner, "d'ye call this rum! Sink me, but it be
half water!"

However, he swallowed the dose with gusto, and smacked his lips at the
end of it as he never would have after a draught of water.

Very steadily and quietly Bernard Kingswell arose to his feet and
looked down at Master Trowley with inscrutable eyes shadowed by his
wide, stained hat. The silence that followed lasted only a few seconds,
but to the staring mariner it seemed a matter of hours. He sprawled on
his low stool, open-mouthed, red-eyed, with his big hands nerveless on
the table, and the lighted pipe unheeded at his feet.

"Traitor!" said Kingswell, coldly; and leaning across the table he
tweaked the purple tip of Trowley's nose between thumb and finger. To do
so, he laid his dagger on the edge of the mahogany for a second. The
indignity called forth no more than a gurgle of terror from the master
mariner. Kingswell plucked up the thin blade and flashed it within an
inch of the whiskered face. Still the fellow sagged on his stool, unable
to stir a muscle. Kingswell whistled three low notes. Ouenwa crawled
through the port, with a coil of light rope in his hand. Tom Bent
followed. Trowley threw off the spell of the supposed ghostly visitation
and got to his feet with a bellow of rage and fear. In an instant he was
flat on his back, with a gagging hand across his mouth and another at
his throat. He was soon bound hand and foot, and securely gagged with a
strip of his own boat-cloak.

Ouenwa stuck his head through the open port, and whispered a word or
two. One by one, four of his braves entered, with their knives
unsheathed. Kingswell motioned them to follow, and softly opened the
cabin door. On the port side of the alley-way, beside the companion
ladder, Trowley's mate lay asleep in his bunk. Kingswell bent over him
and saw that he was a stranger. He nodded significantly; and in an
amazingly short time the mate of the _Heart of the West_ was as neatly
trussed up as the master.

Fifteen minutes later, Tom Bent hung over the rail, aft, and waved a
lantern in three half-circles. And not long after that, Mistress
Westleigh, Master Kingswell, and Ouenwa filled glasses with Canary wine,
in the cabin of the _Heart of the West_. In the waist of the ship the
stout English sailors and the skin-clad Beothics drained their
pannikins, and eyed each other with good-natured curiosity. Old Tom Bent
was toast-master; and also he told them an amazing story.




CHAPTER XXX.

MAGGIE STONE TAKES MUCH UPON HERSELF


Shortly before midnight, Tom Bent went quietly about the task of waking
both watches and the Beothics. The three boats from Fort Beatrix were
manned, with the muffling oars. The two small anchors by which the
_Heart of the West_ swung in the tide were fished into two of the boats
by hand. It was a tough job; but, when it was accomplished, the ship was
free without so much as a clank of cable or a turn of the noisy capstan.
Hawsers were passed from the small craft over the bows of the ship, and
at a signal from a lantern in Kingswell's hand, the men bent their backs
to the oars. Then all lights aboard the _Heart of the West_ were
covered, and in the darkness, beside the great tiller, Kingswell caught
his inspiration and his reward to his heart again.

The girl did not leave the commander's side, but kept watch on the high
poop-deck throughout the journey. Until dawn the rowers held to their
toil, and after them, drawn by lines that were sometimes taut and
sometimes under water, but always invisible in the darkness, the ship
stole like a shape of cloud and dream. It was hard work, and slow. With
the breaking of dawn, the leviathan took on signs of life. By that time
she was hidden from Wigwam Harbour by more than one bluff headland. The
pulling boats drifted to her bows, the capstan was manned, and the
anchors were lifted to their places on the forecast rail. Headsails were
set, and the square mizzen was run up. The boats dropped astern and were
made fast, and the weary men climbed aboard the ship.

All day the _Heart of the West_ threaded the green waterways of the
great Bay of Exploits. A light and favourable breeze lent itself to the
venture. After the midday meal, Beatrix, wrapped in a blanket, lay down
by the mizzen and fell asleep. She was tired. The easy motion of the
ship, and the song of the wind in ropes and canvas, sank her fathoms
deep in slumber, with the magic of a fairy lullaby. Kingswell rigged a
piece of sail-cloth from the bulwarks to the mast to shade her face from
the sun.

At last the wide estuary, which ends in Gray Goose River, was reached.
By sunset the mouth of the river was entered. Just then the wind
failed. The boats were manned again, and the ship taken in tow.

Still Mistress Westleigh slumbered peacefully, with the rough blanket
about her dainty body and her head pillowed on Kingswell's folded coat.
Kneeling beside her, Kingswell peered under the shelter of canvas, and
saw that she was smiling in her dreams. How white were her dropped
eyelids, and how clear and rose-tinted her small face. Her lips were
parted a little, as if to whisper some sweet secret. A strand of her
bright, dark hair was across her forehead, and one arm, clear of the
blanket and the deerskin on which she lay, rested on the deck. The rosy
palm was upturned. Kingswell stooped lower and kissed it softly.
Standing up, he found Tom Bent beside him. The mahogany-hued mariner
grinned sheepishly, and gave a hitch to his belt.

"Beggin' the lady's pardon," he whispered, "but, if the angels in heaven
be half so sweet to look at as herself, I'm for going to heaven, in
spite o' the devil. Sink me, but I'd play one o' they golden harps with
a light heart if--if the equals of herself were a-listenin' on the
quarter-deck."

Kingswell blushed and smiled. "You, too?" said he. "You are in love, Tom
Bent."

"Ay, sir," replied the boatswain, "for it can't be helped. I'm in love
and awash, and danged near to sinkin'. Might as well expect a man to
keep sober in the 'Powdered Admiral' on Bristol dock as within ten
knots, to win'ward or lee'ard, o' your sweetheart, sir."

"I agree with you," replied the gentleman, bowing gravely.

Tom Bent pulled his scant forelock, and rolled away about his duty. He
was mightily pleased with himself at having expressed his admiration for
his young commander's choice in such felicitous terms. He prided himself
on his eye for feminine beauty, no matter what the race or the rank of
the fair one,--and a fairer than Mistress Westleigh he swore by all the
gods of the Seven Seas he had never laid eyes on.

The long spring twilight was gathering into dusk when the toiling boats
and the tall ship rounded the point, and opened the fort to the view of
the daring cruisers. Directly in front of the stockade the anchors
plunged into the brown current. The rattle of the cables through the
hawse-holes awoke Beatrix. She had been dreaming of a great garden in
Somerset, and of walking along box-hedged paths with her father on one
side and her lover on the other. Opening her eyes upon the canvas
shelter which Kingswell had spread above her, and with the clangour of
the running cables in her ears, for a second she did not know where she
was. A vague fear oppressed her for a little. Then she recalled the
incidents of the last two days, and was about to crawl from her
resting-place, when the edge of the shelter was lifted, and Kingswell
looked down at her.

"Wake up," he said. "We are at the fort, and Trigget and Maggie Stone
are coming off in a canoe."

"Nay, then I'll stay here until you explain matters," she replied. "You
must bear the brunt of Maggie Stone's displeasure for my sake." She sat
up, laughing softly, and lifted her face in a way that only a dunce
could fail to comprehend. Under cover of the strip of sail-cloth, he
kissed the warm lips and the bright hair.

"Trust me," he laughed; and at that moment Trigget and the servant
climbed to the poop by way of the ladder from the ship's waist. He
advanced to meet them. He saw that Trigget held a folded paper in his
hand, and that the honest eyes of that bold mariner were red and moist.

"What is it?" he inquired; for he had entirely forgotten, for the time
being, the manner of Mistress Westleigh's joining with the expedition.

"Here be your will, sir," said Trigget, handing him the paper.
"It--it--well, maybe it'll not be o' any use now."

"Of course not," replied Kingswell, cheerfully, tearing it across.

Maggie Stone burst into tears. "Jus' the way Sir Ralph went," she
sobbed. "Oh, my beautiful little lady--an' her fit mate for any nobleman
of London town!"

"What the devil do you mean?" cried Kingswell. Then the truth dawned in
his preoccupied brain. "Dry your eyes," he said. "She is safe and
sound."

"Thank God for that," exclaimed William Trigget, devoutly.

"What--the mistress be safe, d'ye say?" cried Maggie Stone, with a
sudden change of face.

Kingswell nodded curtly. He did not like being bawled at on the poop of
his recaptured ship, even by an old serving maid. "Your mistress is
safe--and in my care," he said.

"Indeed, sir?" she queried. "An' may I make so bold as to ax when ye
married Sir Ralph Westleigh's daughter?"

William Trigget murmured something to the effect that his presence was
required forward, and took his departure. Kingswell bit his lip and
stared haughtily at the woman; but he was at a loss for words fully
expressive of his feelings. His indignation brought a flush to his
cheeks which even the dusk of evening could not hide.

"Ye may well redden," cried Maggie Stone. "Ay, ye may well redden, after
sailin' away with an unprotected lass, an' near terrifyin' her old nurse
into fits."

The gentleman recovered his power of speech. "My good girl," he said
(and she was a full twenty years older than his mother), "your joy at
hearing of your mistress's safety takes a wondrous queer and unseemly
way of expressing itself. You seem to forget that you, the lady's
servant, are addressing the lady's betrothed husband."

The old maid glared and drew her scanty skirts about her.

"Maybe so," she retorted. "'Twould never have happened in Somerset."

At that moment Mistress Beatrix appeared suddenly from the other side of
the mizzen.

"How dare you!" she cried. "How dare you speak so to Master Kingswell!"

Anger--quick, scathing anger--rang in her voice. Standing there in her
short skirt, high, beaded moccasins, and blue cloth jacket, she looked
like an indignant boy, save for her coiled hair and bright beauty.

"I am ashamed of you," she added; and then, turning quickly, she flung
herself into Kingswell's ever ready embrace.

Maggie Stone was flustered and somewhat awed by the sudden attack. She
had not been spoken to so for years and years. Would she resort to tears
again, or would she answer back? She was jealous of the girl's love for
Kingswell--and yet she had thanked God many times that that love had
been won by the young Englishman instead of by the swarthy D'Antons. She
sniffed, and mopped her eyes with the back of her hand. Then she changed
her mind and bridled.

"What would the countess, your aunt, say to such behaviour?" she asked.
"Her who watched over ye like a guardian angel in London town."

Beatrix turned, and, still holding her lover's hands, faced the carping
critic.

"And who turned me out of her house at the last of it," she cried,
scornfully. "Who is she, or who was she ever, to question my behaviour?
And who are you, woman, to insult your mistress and the gentleman who
saved you from the knives of the savages? Go back to the fort."

Maggie Stone saw that she had made a serious mistake,--a mistake which,
perhaps, would alienate the lady's affection for ever. She turned, a
pitiable figure, and made to descend the steep ladder which stood close
to the starboard side of the ship, and led to the waist. Her foot caught
in a loop of rope that had not been properly stopped up to its
belaying-pin. She lurched against the line that ran from the break of
the poop to the bulwarks below, made a blind effort to right herself,
and pitched over into the shadowed water below. She did not even scream.

Kingswell dropped his sweetheart's hands, ran to the side and jumped
after the foolish old woman. By that time the twilight had left the
river. The current carried him swiftly down-stream, close under the side
of the ship. The water was uncomfortably cold, and his thick clothes
dragged at his limbs. He cleared his hair from his eyes. A disturbance
appeared on the surface of the stream a few yards ahead. With a quick
stroke or two, he reached it, and caught Maggie Stone by a thin
shoulder. She struggled desperately, mad with fright. Both were pulled
over the gunwale of the _Pelican_ not a moment too soon.




CHAPTER XXXI.

WHILE THE SPARS ARE SCRAPED


It is difficult to imagine the feelings of the skippers and crews of the
good ship _Plover_ and _Mary and Joyce_, when the gray light of dawn
disclosed the fact that the _Heart of the West_ had vanished completely.
What a rubbing of eyes must have taken place! What a dropping of
whiskered jaws and ripping of sea oaths!

"Sunk," said one heavy-shouldered mariner.

"Then where be her spars?" inquired a messmate.

"Cut an' run," suggested another.

"Then the devil must have been after her! Ol' Trowley'd run from nothin'
else," replied the cook of the _Plover_.

The captain of the _Mary and Joyce_ scanned the inner harbour and what
he could see of the outer bay. Then he turned his brass telescope upon
the cliffs and hills and inland woods.

"Maybe the French has towed mun out," he said at last.

No fishing was done that day. The neighbouring bays and coves were
searched, and even the "River of Three Fires" was investigated, with a
deal of trouble, for several miles up its swift current. That night the
skippers of the two vessels decided, over several hot glasses, that
Wigwam Harbour was no safe place for honest English sailor men. Next
morning found them sailing northward in search of another haven from
which to reap the harvest of the great bay.

To Fort Beatrix journeyed all the Beothics from many miles around, for a
great trade was going on. Influenced by Maggie Stone's foolish outbreak,
Beatrix and Bernard had decided to seek a priest in the port of St.
John's on their way to England, and so cross the ocean as man and wife,
to the bitter chagrin of Bristol scandal-mongers. Though the idea had
not occurred to either of the lovers before the old woman's outcry in
the name of suffering propriety, it was none the less to their liking
now that they had accepted it.

"And it will please poor Maggie Stone," said the girl.

"I was not thinking of her," replied Kingswell, lifting the glowing
face to his by a hand beneath the rounded chin.

"Nor I, dear heart," she replied.

To the others of that wilderness the trading seemed a greater matter
than that romantic attachment of a man and a maid. Blankets, trinkets,
inferior weapons, and even the spare clothing of the settlers were
bartered for pelts of beaver, mink, marten, otter, musquash, and red,
patched, and black fox, to make up a cargo for the _Heart of the West_.
The price of an axe-head was twice its weight in beaver skins. Even
Maggie Stone, with an eye to adding to her nest-egg, traded a skillet
(the identical implement with which she had floored D'Antons) for a
beautiful foxskin. Only Trowley had no finger in the trading. Sullen and
silent, he wandered about the fort, and a few paces behind him a brawny
Beothic always stalked.

The storehouse of the fort was replenished from the well-stocked
pantries and lazaret of the ship. Kingswell smiled grimly when, during
the overhauling of the cabin lockers, he discovered choice wines,
cheeses, and pots of jam which his lady mother had given to Master
Trowley as a slight mark of her gratitude for his services to her son.
He forced an admittance of these things from the old rascal himself. It
had been as he had hinted to Beatrix. The fellow had told the tearful
and credulous lady that he had risked his life in her son's defence,
during an engagement with the savages; and she, grateful heart, had made
such an unbusiness-like agreement with him for the sailing of the ship
that, had the voyage run its anticipated course, even a full load of
fish would not have saved her from a shrewd loss. Happily for Trowley,
Master Kingswell was far too happy for such trivial matters to really
anger him.

"The old rogue staked his soul and lost on the last throw," he said to
Beatrix, "and I staked my heart, and won all that the world holds of
joy. Surely I should be a low fellow to add to his misfortunes, poor
devil. I can afford to be charitable now."

They were seated on the grassy edge of the river meadow, looking out at
the anchored ship, where sailors were repairing the rigging and scraping
the spars. The girl did not seem keenly interested in Trowley's
underhand behaviour to Dame Kingswell. As to his treachery toward
Kingswell, to tell the truth, she was very grateful to the old thief for
having sailed away and left her lover in the wilderness. Such thoughts
flitted pleasantly through her mind.

"When did you stake your heart?" she asked, as if that were the core of
the whole thing.

"I cannot tell you the date exactly," replied Kingswell, "but I was in
Pierre d'Antons' company at the time, and--and I was mightily surprised
to find Somersetshire people in this country. Lord, but your eyes were
bright."

"Do you mean that you--do you mean that it happened on the first day of
your arrival at the fort?" she queried.

"Surely," said he.

"And you loved me then?"

He nodded, smiling across toward the busy mariners in the rigging of his
ship. His memories of those perilous days were fragrant as an English
rose-garden.

"Do you know," she whispered, "that, though I felt sure I had made an
impression on you then, I began to doubt it later. You were so
self-satisfied that you shook my faith in my own powers to charm."

He laughed softly, and with a note of wonder. Then, for a little while,
they were silent.

"Tell me," she said, suddenly. "Did you really love me that first day
you came to the fort, or was it just--just surprise at seeing a--a
civilized girl in so forsaken a place?"

He considered the question gravely and at some length. "I wanted to
kill D'Antons," he answered, presently, "and I would gladly have given
ten years of my life for a kiss from your lips, a caress from your
hands. Was that love, think you?"

"I should call it a right hopeful beginning," she replied, brightly; but
tears which she could not explain shone in her eyes. Across the hurrying
water drifted the song of the men at work upon the tall masts of the
_Heart of the West_.

"In a week's time," said Kingswell, "she will fill her sails for St.
John's--and then for home."

The girl nestled closer to his side. Looking down, he saw that she was
weeping.

"God grant that we find a parson in that harbour," he added. She nodded,
and choked with a sob she could not stifle.

"Why do you weep, dearest?" he asked.

"For those whom we must leave behind," she whispered.

He had no answer to make to that. Together they looked beyond the
anchored ship and the bright river to the inscrutable wilderness that
held the fate of the mad baronet so securely.




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE FIRST STAGE OF THE HOMEWARD VOYAGE IS BRAVELY ACCOMPLISHED


At nine o'clock of the morning of the twenty-second day of June, the bow
of the _Heart of the West_ was towed around and pointed down-stream by
willing boats and canoes; a light wind filled such sails as were set,
and the voyage was begun. Trigget fired a salute from a new gun which
Kingswell had given him from the armament of the ship. It was answered
by the barking of cannon and the fluttering of sails.

Ouenwa stood with Mistress Westleigh, Kingswell, and Maggie Stone, aft
by the tiller, which was in the hands of Tom Bent. The lad was fairly
wild with excitement. Now, it seemed to him, his great dreams were
assured; and yet a pang of homesickness went through the joy like the
blade of a knife, as he watched the faces of the clustered people along
the meadow and in the boats grow dim,--the faces of William Trigget and
Black Feather, and of a dozen more who were dear to him. He shouted back
to them in English and in his native tongue, and waved his cap
frantically. The faces blurred and wavered. The ship swam around the
wooded point, and meadow and stockade and camp of wigwams vanished like
a picture withdrawn. The lad turned and glanced at Mistress Westleigh.
Then he walked forward to the break of the poop, and blinked very hard
at nothing in particular in the belly of the maintopsail.

Soon the wooded banks fell away on either side, and the water changed
its tint of amber for wind-roughened green. The gray, purple, and brown
shores of the roadstead widened and dropped lower, and azure uplands
shone beyond their frowning brows. The wind freshened, and white flakes
of foam whipped from crest to crest across the ever-shifting,
ever-vanishing valleys of green. Along the fading cliffs white sea-birds
circled and settled like flakes of snow. A few great gulls winged around
the ship, fleeing to leeward like bolts of mist, and beating up again
with quivering pinions.

Kingswell had taken the duties of sailing-master upon himself. He was as
good a deep-sea navigator as any man on the whole width of the North
Atlantic. When the outer bay was reached, yards were swung around, and
the stout bark headed due east at his orders. To see old Tom Bent push
the tiller over, and other seasoned mariners man brace and sheet, at the
command of that gold-haired youth, made the heart of Beatrix Westleigh
flutter with pride. Her dark eyes, already bright and lovely beyond
power of description, shone yet more brightly; and her cheeks, already
flushed to clear flame by the wind, deepened their glow. As the ship
answered to his will, so would he answer to her whim. It was a pleasant
reflection to the lady; and to realize it she called softly. Without a
glance at the straining sails, he turned and hastened to her side.

The voyage from Fort Beatrix to the wonderful harbour and brave little
town of St. John's was made without accident, though not without
incident. In Bonavista Bay, at a gray hour of the morning, the stump of
a great iceberg was narrowly avoided. A day later, a large vessel that
was evidently employed at fishing evinced an undesirable interest in the
business of the _Heart of the West_. She was not a quarter of a mile
distant when first sighted, for a light fog was on the water. She flew
no flag, and changed her course and altered her speed with sinister
promptness. Kingswell, and every man of the ship's company, knew that
pirates of many nationalities infested those waters during summer. The
worst of the thieves were Turks; and the fishing-ship or store-ship that
was overhauled by those gentry usually lost more than its cargo.
Frenchmen, Englishmen, and Spaniards also had a weakness for playing the
part of the bald eagle, with their heavy metalled and wide-sailed craft,
to the rle of the fishhawk so unwillingly played by the merchantmen.
Happily for Kingswell's command, the stranger was inshore and to
leeward. Both watches were piped up by Tom Bent. The gunners went to
their quarters. Sail after sail unfurled about the already straining
masts and yards. The brave little ship answered willingly to the
pressure, and her cutwater broke the flanks of the waves into sibilant
foam.

A rumour of the chase reached Mistress Beatrix and her old maid, in the
seclusion of that snug cabin in which Master Trowley was, at one time,
wont to revel. Maggie Stone drew the curtains across the thick glass of
the after-port (as if fearing that the eagle glance of one of the
pirates might pierce the privacy of her retreat), and then devoted
herself to tearful prayer. Beatrix completed her toilet, threw a cloak
over her shoulders, and climbed the companion. She joined Kingswell by
the tiller, and, after saluting him tenderly and with a composure that
took no heed of the sailor at the helm, watched the chase with interest.

"They outsail us," she said, presently.

Kingswell nodded. "But she'll never get near us on that course," he
replied. "She is for heading us off, and getting to windward. If she
gets to windward of us--Lord, but I scarce think she will."

He said a word of preparation to the man at the tiller, and then gave a
few quick orders from the break of the poop. In half a minute the _Heart
of the West_ headed out on an easy tack. When every sail was drawing to
his liking, he returned to the girl.

"How glorious!" she cried. "A good horse, a singing pack, and an old fox
make but slow sport compared to this."

"We are the fox on this hunting morning," smiled Kingswell.

"With teeth," she hinted.

He noticed that the unwelcome stranger was shouldering the wind on the
new course. He looked at the girl.

"Ay, we have teeth, sweeting," he said, "and soon we'll be gnashing
them."

Though the _Heart of the West_ sailed well, to windward, the big craft
astern sailed even better. The ships, crowded with canvas, the dancing
blue water and cloudless sky, and the brown and azure coast to leeward,
made a fine picture under the white sun. As the stranger drew near and
nearer, excitement increased aboard the merchantman. Old Trowley bawled
to be set free, that he might not die in the sail-locker like a rat in a
hole. Tom Bent spat on his hard hands, and pulled his belt an inch
shorter. Ouenwa lugged up shot and powder, and was for opening fire at
an impossible range. Beatrix roused Maggie Stone from her devotions, and
took her forward to a place of greater safety in the men's quarters.

Along either side of the after-cabin of the _Heart of the West_ ran a
narrow passage. Each passage ended in a blind port, and behind each port
crouched a gun of unusual size for so peaceful an appearing ship. Now
Kingswell blessed the day that a youthful love of warlike gear and a
heart for adventure had led him to add these pieces to the armament of
his ship. He remembered, with a contented smile, how Master Trowley had
growled at the delay caused by getting the great guns aboard and
partitioning off the passage. Even his mother had urged him to put more
faith in the great ship which the king was so gracious as to send to
Newfounde Land each spring, as a convoy to the fishing fleet. But
Master Bernard, spoiled child, had had his way; and now he thanked the
gods of war for it.

Both ships sailed as close to the wind as their models and rigging and
the laws of nature would allow. They went about often on ever shortening
tacks. The hunter outsailed the hunted, though it is safe to say that
her seamanship was no better. Suddenly she luffed until her sails
quivered, and from her bows broke two puffs of smoke with inner cores of
flame. Both shots flew high, and fell ahead of the quarry in brief
spouts of torn water. At that, the blind ports in the stern of the
merchantman opened up, and the sinister muzzles of the guns were run out
with a gust of English cheering. Then their sudden voices boomed
defiance, and the smoke rolled along the water and clung to the leaping
waves.

Kingswell felt the deck jump under his feet. His pulses leaped with the
good planks. "Hit!" he cried--and sure enough, one of the enemy's upper
spars, with its burden of flapping canvas, tottered desperately, and
then swooped down on the clustered buccaneers beneath. Half an hour
later the _Heart of the West_ was spinning along on her old course, and
far astern the stranger lay to and nursed her wound.

Three days later, at high noon, the Narrows opened in the sheer brown
face of the cliffs, and the people of the _Heart of the West_ caught a
glimpse of the harbour and the shipping beyond. Then the rocky portals
seemed to close, and the spray flew like smoke along the unbroken
ramparts. The ship was put about, and again the magic entrance opened
and shut.

"I knows the channel, sir," said Tom Bent. "Ye needn't wait for no
duff-headed pilot."

So the stout ship went 'round again, with a brisk shouting of men at the
braces and a booming of canvas aloft. Her colours flew bravely in the
sunlight, answering the colours of the fort and the battery on Signal
Hill. She raced at the towering cliff as if she would try to overthrow
it with her cocked-up bowsprit. Even Kingswell caught his breath.
Beatrix looked away, so fearful was the sight of the unbroken rock that
seemed to swim toward them with a voice of thunder and the smoking surf
along its foot. Ouenwa wondered if Tom Bent were mad. But the boatswain
gripped the big tiller, and squinted under the yards, and cocked an eye
aloft at the flags and men on the cliff. Then, of a sudden, the narrow
passage of green water, spray-fringed, opened under their bows, and the
walls of rock slid aside and let them in.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

IN THE MERRY CITY


The _Heart of the West_ was boarded by a lieutenant of infantry, inside
the Narrows, and was quickly piloted to a berth on the north side of the
great harbour, where her anchors were merrily let go. The lieutenant
welcomed Master Kingswell in the governor's name, and vowed to Mistress
Westleigh that the old shellback (with so little respect will a
subaltern sometimes speak of his superior into safe ears) would never
have allowed his gout to keep him ashore had he guessed that the new
arrival carried such a passenger.

"But his Excellency is a sailor," he added, "so, after all, he'd blink
his old eyes at you unmoved. These sailors, ecod, are not the
worshippers of beauty that the poets would have us believe."

He bowed again, very fine in his new uniform and powdered hair. Beatrix
shot a glance at Kingswell, who seemed in no wise conscious of the
dimness of his own attire and the rents in the silk facings of his
coat. Then she smiled upon the soldier.

"Both the army and navy have my esteem," she said, "but my particular
fancy is for the Church."

The lieutenant seemed overwhelmed. "Say you so?" he cried. "And to
think, mistress, that I refused to take Holy Orders, despite the
combined persuasion of both my parents and my uncle, the Bishop of Bath.
Stab me, but why did not my heart give me a hint of your preference?"

"Perhaps you have a parson ashore," suggested Kingswell.

"Ay, we have a parson--a ranting old missionary," replied the
lieutenant.

"He'll serve my turn," said Beatrix, "so long as he can read the
marriage service."

"Ay, he'll serve our turn," said Kingswell.

The soldier sighed, and smiled whimsically from the one to the other. He
was not much older than Bernard Kingswell, and of a pleasant, boyish
countenance.

"You have a story," he said, "with which I hope you will honour us in
the governor's house. A brave tale, too, I'll stake my sword." He smiled
good-naturedly at Master Kingswell. "But d'ye know," he added, gazing at
Mistress Westleigh, "I had quite set my heart on it that you two were
brother and sister."

The governor received them in his best coat, with one foot in a boot,
and the other swathed to the bulk of a soldier's knapsack. His face was
of the tint of russet leather, and, roughened by many inclement winds
and darkened by high living. His voice was of a rancorous quality, as if
he had frayed it by too much shouting through fogs and against gales.
His hands were big, knotted, and tremulous, and his eyes not unlike
those of a new-jigged codfish. Altogether he was a figure of a man for
his place as king's representative. He led Mistress Beatrix to a chair
with such grace as he could command, and presented a ponderous snuff-box
to Master Kingswell. Then he called for refreshments. The lieutenant
made himself at home beside the lady, and waited upon her with wine and
cakes. When the servants were gone and the door closed, Kingswell stated
his name and degree.

"Let me shake your hand again, young sir," cried his Excellency,
extending an unsteady hand. "Your honoured father dined and wined me
more than once in his great house in Bristol,--ay, and treated the poor
sailor like a peer of the realm."

Kingswell leaned sideways in his chair and gave a brief account of Sir
Ralph Westleigh's and Mistress Westleigh's sojourn in the wilderness,
and of the baronet's death. He did not mention the fact that the fort
was still inhabited, nor did he give a very definite idea of its
whereabouts. It was well to be cautious in regard to unchartered
plantations in those days of greedy fishermen. He mentioned the brief
engagement with the buccaneer. He told of his betrothal to Mistress
Westleigh, and of their anxiety to be married immediately. The governor
was deeply affected by the story of Sir Ralph Westleigh's last days. He
murmured an oath. "And the day was," he said, "that not a duke in
England was more looked up to than that same baronet of Somerset. Well
do I recall the pride that inflated me when Lady Westleigh--ay, the
young lady's mother--bowed to me in Hyde Park. Only once had she met me,
and that in a crush to which I'd been invited through my commander. And
she was as beautiful as she was gracious, sir. 'Twas after her death
that Sir Ralph threw over his ballast, poor devil."

Kingswell nodded, and remembered the winter of alarms and loneliness.

"They were bitter years for the daughter," he said, softly. "Motherless,
and with a father whom she loved letting slip his old pride and honour
day by day, she shared his downfall and his exile with fortitude, sir,
I can assure you."

"Ay, as became her brave beauty," replied the governor, with a gleam in
his staring eyes.

Now fate would have it at that time the only divine in the great island,
the Reverend Thomas Aldrich, M. A., was away from the little town of St.
John's, on a preaching tour among the English fishermen in Conception
Bay. He might be back in a day's time; he was more likely not to return
within the week.

"In the meantime," said the honest governor, "my house is at Mistress
Westleigh's service. Let her send for her maid and her boxes. My good
housekeeper will tidy up the best chamber. Gad, Master Kingswell, but
we'll cheer this God-forsaken, French-pestered hole in the rock with a
touch of gaiety."

His Excellency's hospitality was accepted, and for eight days the little
settlement gave itself over to merrymaking. There were dances in the
governor's house every night, at which Beatrix was the only lady. There
were great dinners, during which Beatrix sat on his Excellency's right
and Kingswell on his left. There were inspections of the fort, boating
parties on the harbour, and outings among the woods and natural gardens
that graced the valley at the head of the beautiful basin.

The beauty and graciousness of Mistress Westleigh, and the knowledge of
her loyalty to her father, and her bravery won the heart of that rude
village. From the governor to the youngest sailor lad, every man in the
harbour was her humble and devoted servant.

Before the kindly soldiers and merchants and adventurers, she was always
merry. The main street along the water-front took on a light of distant
England did she but appear in it for a minute. The three officers of the
garrison swore that they preferred it to the most fashionable promenade
on London. But, alone, or with her lover, she eased, with tears, the
grief for her father's fate, which all the junketing and gaiety but
seemed to uncover.

On the eighth day after the arrival of the _Heart of the West_ in the
harbour of St. John's, the parson returned from his preaching among the
boisterous fishing-ships in Conception Bay. He shook his head at the
state in which he found his home flock; for he was of that gloomy
persuasion known as low church, and held little with frivolity. But,
after meeting Beatrix, he thawed, and even went so far as to attempt a
pun on his willingness to marry her. The sally of wit was received by
the lady with so lovely a smile that the divine forgot his austerity so
far as to poke Kingswell in the ribs, and call him a sly dog.

The ceremony took place in the little church behind the governor's
house; and, after it was over, his Excellency, the parson, the officers
of the garrison, the merchants, the captains of the ships, and many
more, accompanied the happy couple aboard the _Heart of the West_, where
sound wines were drunk by the quality, and rum and beer by the
commonalty. All the shipping, the premises of the merchants, and the
forts flew bunting, as if for a demonstration to royalty itself. At noon
farewells were said, and a dozen willing boats towed the _Heart of the
West_ down the harbour and through the Narrows.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

PIERRE D'ANTONS SIGNALS HIS OLD COMRADES, AND AGAIN PUTS TO SEA


The wilderness, that grim thing of naked rock, brown barren, gray marsh,
and black wood, which had claimed the mad baronet so surely, was unable
to keep Pierre d'Antons in its spacious prison. With the return of
summer, the dark adventurer and the Beothic girl deserted their inland
retreat, and set out for a certain grim cape which thrusts far into the
Atlantic. The crown of that cape affords an uninterrupted view to
seaward and north and south across the waters of two great bays. A fire
at night, or a column of smoke in the day, glowing or streaming upward
from that vantage place, would be sighted from the deck of a passing
ship at a distance of many miles.

The journey proved a long and trying one, through swamps and barrens,
and over rock-tumbled knolls. Streams were forded, lakes
circumambulated, and rivers crossed on insecure rafts. Through it all,
the native girl, Miwandi, kept a brave heart and bright face. D'Antons,
however, was preoccupied in his manner, and even gloomy at times. The
hardships of that wild existence had begun to tell on his body, and the
loneliness to fret his nerves. His infatuation for Mistress Westleigh
had dimmed and faded out altogether, leaving only a mean desire for the
salve of revenge with which to soothe his injured pride. He would wound
her through Kingswell. Sometimes a fear oppressed him that his men might
have forgotten his mastery by this time, and might fail, after the two
seasons of silence, to continue their cruising of those northern waters
throughout June and July, as he had commanded. But that doubt only
troubled him in his darkest moods. The loyalty of his subordinate
buccaneers of the _Cristobal_ was not to be questioned seriously, for it
had been tested in many tight places. Comradeship often forms as trusty
ties between the hearts of pirates as between the hearts of honest
gentlemen. Once grown beyond the temptations of greed and treachery, it
is a safe thing, this loyalty of desperate men for their messmates.

It was Pierre d'Antons' dream to regain the deck of the _Cristobal_
(with Miwandi, of course), and to appear, some fine day, before the
little fort of Gray Goose River; to put the settlers to the sword, the
buildings to the torch, and to carry the English beauty away with him.
He felt that his passion for the proud lady might be easily and
pleasantly refired. But he made no mention of Mistress Westleigh to
Miwandi, the Beothic girl.

After more than a week of hard travelling, the two ascended the wooded
ridge which runs seaward to the bleak and elevated acres of the grim
cape of their desire. In a shaggy grove they set up their lodge. At the
extremity of the headland, high above the wheeling, screaming gulls and
noddies, D'Antons built a circular fireplace of the stones that lay
about. Completed, it looked like an altar reared by some benighted
priesthood to the gods of the wind and the sea. But no such thought
occurred to its architect. His case was too desperate to allow his mind
to indulge in such whimsical fancies.

While the woman went in quest of food--fish, flesh, or fowl, what did it
matter which?--the man gathered wood and piled it near the queer hearth.
He worked without intermission until Miwandi returned from her foraging
with a string of bright trout in her hand. Then he built a modest fire
within the rough walls of his furnace, and helped the girl clean and
cook the fish. By that time the glow of the afternoon was centred
behind the gloomy hills, and a clear twilight was over the sea; but as
yet the atmosphere held no suggestion of dusk. No sail broke the wide
expanse of dark blue ocean with its flake of gray; but to the nor'east a
whale breached and blew its little fountain of spray across the still
line of the horizon. D'Antons and Miwandi noted these things as they
ate, but made no comment upon them.

For several days after the arrival of the two upon the overseeing
headland, D'Antons made no other use of his furnace than for the cooking
of meals. For that purpose it served admirably, for the walls protected
the flame from the ever-flying winds that prevailed over that exposed
spot. The adventurer knew that he was early for the _Cristobal_. Several
sails were detected; but of them the only heed taken was the precaution
of blanketing the little fire in the hearth with damp soil. The
Frenchman did not desire a visit from fishermen of any nationality
whatever. He might find it difficult to explain his presence in so
unfavourable a spot for either a fishery or a settlement. No doubt they
would persist in rescuing him, and, in that case, what reason could he
give for wishing to stay in his cheerless camp? So he lay low and
watched the passing of more than one stout craft without a sign.

The time arrived when he must set his signals, despite the risk of
attracting unwelcome visitors. So he closed the front of the furnace
with a boulder, built a brisk fire within, which he heaped with damp
moss and punk, and then laid a large, flat stone over the opening in the
top of the unique structure. By removing the flat stone, he allowed a
column of dense smoke to issue into the air, stream aloft and scatter in
the wind. By replacing the stone, the smoke was cut short off. Finding
that the contrivance worked to his satisfaction, he let the smoke stream
up, uninterrupted. The signalling would only be resorted to when a
vessel, which might possibly be the _Cristobal_, should be sighted. When
darkness fell, the fire was allowed to die down. A night signal was
unnecessary, as the _Cristobal_, should she keep the tryst at all, was
sure to make an examination of the cape by daylight. D'Antons' last
orders had been strictly and particularly to that effect.

A week passed, during which a sharp lookout was kept by the fugitives on
the brow of the cape, and the signal of smoke was operated a dozen times
without the desired effect. In fact, a large vessel, attracted by the
smoke (which was due to D'Antons' tardy realization that the
approaching ship was not the _Cristobal_) altered her course, sailed
close in, and sent a boat ashore to investigate. D'Antons and Miwandi
had just enough time, with not a minute to spare, to roll up their
wigwam and hide it in the bushes, gather together their most valuable
belongings, and flee inland to a shelter of tangled spruces and firs.
The boat's crew was composed of peaceful fishermen, who were free from
suspicion and malice. They climbed to the brow of the promontory with
fine hardihood, but once there did little but examine the marks where
the lodge had so lately stood and partially overthrow the queer
fireplace. They believed that structure to be an altar, built to the
glory of some unorthodox god. Then they retraced their perilous way to
the little cove under the cliff, and rowed back to the ship. D'Antons
stole from his retreat and crawled to the edge of the cliff. He felt a
glow of satisfaction when the big vessel stood away on her northward
course.

Another week drifted along, and hope wavered in the buccaneer heart. His
gloomy moods began to wear on the young squaw's spirits. She begged him
to return to the inland rivers--to make peace with her people--to cease
his unprofitable staring at the sea.

"The sorrow of the great salt water has entered your heart," she said,
"and the moaning of it has deafened your ears to my voice."

He did not turn his eyes from the undulations of the gray horizon.
"Would you have me rot in this place for the remainder of my life?" he
asked, harshly, in her language.

The poor girl sobbed for an hour after that, and reproved her heart for
the image of a god it had set up. She tried to overthrow the idol from
its inner shrine; she tried to change it to a grim symbol of hate; she
pressed her face to the coarse herbage, and tore the sod with her
fingers.

"Miwandi! Come to me, little one," cried the man from the edge of the
cliff.

Her anger, her bitterness, vanished like thinnest smoke. She sprang up
and ran to him. He drew her to his side, and with his right hand pointed
southward across the glinting deep.

"The _Cristobal_!" he cried. "Good God, I'll stake my life on it!"

So intense was his satisfaction at the sight of those unmistakable
topsails that his selfish affection for the woman lighted again. He
pressed his lips to the tear-wet cheek; and immediately the simple
creature was in the seventh heaven of bliss.

While the gray flake of sail expanded on the horizon, Pierre d'Antons
and the woman hurriedly and roughly rebuilt the walls of the fireplace,
lit and fed a blaze, and piled it high with moss and rotten bark. The
thick pillar of smoke arose like a tree, and bent in the moderate wind.
Miwandi busied herself with breaking the wood to the required length and
carrying damp moss. For several minutes the smoke was allowed to ascend
in an unbroken shaft. Then D'Antons cut it off for a few seconds, let it
rise again, broke it again, and again let it stream aloft,
uninterrupted. He had signalled his name according to the code of the
_Cristobal_.

The welcome ship gradually enlarged to the eager eyes of the watchers on
the cape. North, east, and south there was no other sail in sight. At
last three flags ran up to the topforemast and fluttered out. The
question was read instantly by D'Antons, who returned to his fire and
interrupted the stream of smoke five times in quick succession. The
translation of that was "All's well. You may approach without danger."

A message of congratulation appeared promptly against the bellying
foresail of the _Cristobal_; and the watchers saw the rolls of white
foam gleaming like wool under the forging of the bow.

D'Antons was cordially welcomed aboard the _Cristobal_. Miwandi was
received without question. The acting commander of the ship was a
grizzled Spanish mariner by the name of Silva,--a fellow steeped in
crime and uncertain of temper, yet possessed of a marvellous devotion
for D'Antons, which was due to an act of kindness performed by the
Frenchman years before, in the town of Panama.

Silva was delighted to find his captain alive and ready for the high
seas again. He asked no questions concerning his adventures until more
than one bottle of wine had been emptied, and the captain's
travel-stained garments had been exchanged for the best the cabin
lockers contained. Miwandi, too, was reclothed; and the beauty and
softness of the silks that were presented to her fairly turned her
little head. She did not know that the fair French lady for whom they
had been made, in gay Paris, and who had worn them only three months
ago, was somewhere in the dredge of emerald tides between the Bahaman
reefs. She knew only that the texture and colours delighted her skin and
her eyes. So, in her narrow room, she attired herself in the finery,
toiling at the ties and lacing with unfamiliar fingers.

In the captain's cabin D'Antons motioned to his friend to close the
door. He had consumed a soup, and was still engaged with the wine.
Silva returned to his seat at the table, after a final reassuring push
on the bolt of the door. It is always wise to be sure that the door you
considered fastened is fastened indeed. Then, with their elbows on the
table and their heads close together, the more salient incidents of
D'Antons' sojourn in the wilderness were rehearsed and keenly listened
to. Silva displayed a prodigious indignation at the story of the
captain's failure to win the affections of Mistress Westleigh. At word
of Sir Ralph's death (and the murder became a desperate duel in the
telling), a crooked smile of satisfaction distorted his face. As to what
he heard of Kingswell--ah, but oaths in two languages were quite
inadequate for the expression of his feelings.

"We'll inspect the heart of that cockerel--and the gizzard as well,"
said he, and drank off his wine.

"Leave him to my hand," replied D'Antons, darkly.

Silva nodded, with a sinister leer.

"So it's 'bout ship and blow the little stockade into everlasting
damnation," he said.

"Ay, but the lady must come to no harm in the attack," warned the
captain.

So the _Cristobal_ headed northward, and the evil-looking rascals of
her crew were informed that the morrow would bring them some work to
limber their muscles. The information was received with cheers, in which
hearty English voices were not lacking.

However, in the early morning, Fate, in the shape of the _Heart of the
West_, turned the danger away from the little fort.

"She looks like a likely prize," said D'Antons, when he sighted the
ship. The old fever awoke in his blood. He longed for the old
excitement.

"Give chase," he ordered. "The fort can well do without the honour of
our attentions for a little while."

So the chase was carried on, as has been described in a previous
chapter, and went merrily enough for the _Cristobal_ until the
unexpected shot from the stern of the quarry brought down her
foretopmast and its weight of sail. But before that had happened,
D'Antons, unrecognizable himself in new clothes and a great hat, marked
Bernard Kingswell on the poop of the _Heart of the West_. He cursed like
a madman, or a true-bred pirate, when his ship was crippled.

"The fort may rot of old age in the midst of its desolation," he cried
to Silva, "for what I would have is aboard that cursed craft ahead."

A few days later, with their spars repaired, they picked up a small
fishing-boat, and learned from the skipper that a great ship from the
north had entered the harbour of St. John's. So, knowing the virtue of
precaution, they impressed the master and crew and scuttled the little
vessel. Then, with admirable patience, they cruised up and down, far to
seaward of the brown cliffs which guarded that hospitable port.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE BRIDEGROOM ATTENDS TO OTHER MATTERS THAN LOVE


The dainty bride leaned on her husband's arm, and together they looked
back and waved farewell. Flags answered them from the battery above the
cliff. Then she turned to the bridegroom and gazed into his eyes with so
radiant and tender a smile that, all forgetful of the abashed salt at
the tiller, he drew her to him and kissed her on brow and lips.

"Dear wife," he murmured, and could say no more.

Both were brave in marriage finery,--she in a pearl gown of brocaded
silk, a scarlet cloak lined with white fur, and a feathered hat, and he
in buff and blue from the wardrobe of the commandant of St. John's.

They gazed astern, across the dancing azure, to the brown and purple
rocks beautified by the sunlight and crystal air. "Homeward bound," she
whispered, happily, and turned her face from the mellowing coast of the
wilderness to the wide east.

Together they walked forward to the break of the high deck. A fair wind
bellied the sails. The tarred rigging and scraped spars shone like
polished metal. The men, in their brightest sashes and cleanest shirts
(in honour of the occasion), went about their duties briskly. The mates
wore their side-arms; both watches were on deck, with the gaiety of the
days ashore still in their hearts. Not a soul was below save the cook
(who sorted provisions in the forward lazaret), Maggie Stone (who sulked
in her mistress's cabin because she had not been asked to act as
bridesmaid), and old Trowley, with wrists and legs in irons and a
dawning repentance in his sullen blood.

An hour later Ouenwa ascended the starboard ladder from the waist, and
stood beside Master and Mistress Kingswell. He wore a dashing outfit,
which had been made to his shape by the garrison tailor in the days
preceding the marriage. A sword was at his belt; lace hung at his
wrists; his dark hair, slightly curled, fell to his shoulders. His
tanned cheeks were flushed with the excitement passed and the adventures
anticipated. Only the dark alertness of his eyes and the litheness of
his actions bespoke his primitive upbringing. Though he had been named
"dreamer" by his people, he gave promise now of a life of deeds rather
than of dreams.

"Do you mourn the little stockade and the great river, lad?" queried
Kingswell, laying a hand on the boy's shoulder.

Ouenwa shook his head emphatically and glanced knowingly aloft. "Why
should I mourn them?" he asked. "Am I not bound for castles and great
houses, for books in number as the leaves of the birch-tree, and for
villages filled all day with warriors, and with ladies almost as fair as
Mistress Beatrix? Shall I not read in the books, and see horses, greater
than caribou, bearing gentlemen upon their backs? Then why would you
have me mourn? The land behind us is not a good land. My fathers were
brave and wise, and led their warriors to a hundred victories; but they
were murdered by their own people. I care not for such a country."

"True, lad," replied Kingswell, "and yet, even in glorious England, you
may find ingratitude as black as that of Panounia. Even kings and queens
have been guilty of ingratitude."

Beatrix patted the moralist's arm.

"Why think of it now?" she said, gently, "and why fill the dear lad with
doubt? Only if he climbs high need he fear disloyalty. As a plain
soldier, he shall never lack the protection of such humble friends as
ourselves."

Just then a lookout warned them of a sail on the larboard bow. Kingswell
and Ouenwa went forward to the forecastle-head. Tom Bent (now of the
rank of chief gunner) was already there, peering away under the lift of
the jibs. The second mate was with him.

"A large vessel," remarked Kingswell.

"Ay, and we's spoke mun afore now, sir," replied Bent. He was too intent
on gazing ahead to see the question in the captain's face. But the mate
saw it and answered it.

"She's run up a new spar, sir, an' mended her for'ard riggin'," said he,
"an' like enough she thinks she'll take the cost of damages out o' us."

"Ah!" exclaimed Kingswell, with a note of relish. Then he remembered
Beatrix, and a shadow darkened his eyes for a moment. "Pipe both
watches," he said, quietly. "Arm all hands. Clear decks for action.
Master Gunner, you must fight your barkers to-day for more than the
glory of England."

He returned to his wife and told her of the menace. She heard the news
with an inward sickening, but with no outward tremor. All her fear was
for him.

"Promise me that you will go to our cabin when I give the word," he
asked.

She nodded and smiled wistfully. "Your obedient, humble wife, my lord,"
she whispered, with a brave attempt at gaiety.

He caught her hands quickly to his shoulders and kissed her lips. He
felt them tremble against his.

"I must help with the preparations, dear heart," he murmured, and
hurried away. He consulted the mates and Tom Bent as to the advisability
of beating back for St. John's. The mariners shook their heads. They
held that the _Heart of the West_ could make a better fight on her
present course; and that the battle would be decided, one way or
another, before the garrison could send them any help. As if to confirm
their views, the wind freshened to such a degree, and held so fair
astern, that to beat to windward would require all hands at the sails,
and put gunnery out of the question.

"Like enough they be double our strength in men," said Tom Bent, "but we
equals 'em in guns and seamanship, sir, an' ye may lay to that."

So the _Heart of the West_ held on her course under a press of canvas.

After Kingswell and Beatrix had talked together for some time, they
went forward, hand in hand, to the break of the poop. Tom Bent called
the ship's company to attention. The brave fellows, stripped to their
breeches and shirts in readiness for the approaching encounter, looked
up, and such as wore caps doffed them respectfully.

"My brave lads," cried the lady, in a voice that rang clear above the
stir of wind and wave and tugging cordage, "but this morning you made
merry for my sake; and now, in so little a while, you will risk your
lives in defending your ship and me from that pirate whom we have
already encountered. My husband,--your captain,--like a true-bred
English sailor, is already sure of victory. A generous mariner, he has
promised me the prize; and now I promise it to you. In a few weeks'
time, my lads, we shall sell our enemy in Bristol docks. Not a penny of
her price shall go to owner or captain; but all into the pockets of this
brave company. And should any man fall in the encounter, I pledge my
word that those dependent upon him shall lack nothing that money can
give them during the remainder of their lives. Now, fight well, for God
and for England."

She looked down at them, smiling divinely.

"And for the Lady Beatrix," shouted a youthful seaman.

Cheers rang aloft; bearded lips and shaven lips bawled her name; and
great, toil-seared hands were brandished, and stark blades gleamed in
the sunlight.

"God bless you, lady," they roared.

She leaned forward and blew a kiss from her lips with both dainty hands.

"God strengthen you, brave hearts," she cried, softly; and the nearer of
the loyal mariners saw the tears shimmering beneath her lashes.

The _Heart of the West_ held on her course, breaking the waves in
fountains from her forging bow. The _Cristobal_ raced down upon her with
the wind square abeam. It was evidently her intention to cross the
merchantman's bows and rake her with a broadside.

Aboard the _Heart of the West_ every man was at his post, and the
matches were like pale stars in the hands of the gunners. The second
mate was on the forecastle-head, beside the bow-chaser. The first mate
stood in the waist. Kingswell paced the poop, fore and aft. Each
measured and calculated the brisk approach of the _Cristobal_ with
unwinking eyes, and considered the straining sails overhead and the
speed of the wind.

Still the pirate boiled down upon them, leaning over in the press of
the half-gale. It was evident to Kingswell that she would pass across
his bows within a distance of a hundred yards, unless something was done
to prevent it. He spoke quietly to the men at the tiller, and called an
order to the officer amidships. Twenty seconds later he gave the signal.
The tiller was pushed over, the yards were hauled around, and the good
ship swung to the north and took the wind on her larboard beam. Now the
vessels leaned on the same course, and were not two hundred yards apart.
Almost at the same moment they exchanged broadsides, and the challenging
shouts of men mingled with the roaring of the little cannonades. The
smoke from the merchantman's ports blew down, in a stifling cloud, upon
the enemy. The _Cristobal_ fell off before the wind in an unaccountable
manner. The _Heart of the West_ luffed, in the hope of bringing her
heavy after-battery to bear, saw that the manoeuvre could not be
accomplished, and flew about on her old course.

"Her tiller is shot away," cried Kingswell. A cheer rang along the decks
and penetrated the cabins fore and aft. Beatrix heard it, and thanked
God. Old Trowley heard it, and, beating his manacled wrists against the
bulkhead, roared to be cast loose that he might bear a hand in the
fight.

From that first exchange of round-shot, the _Heart of the West_ escaped
without hurt, owing to the fact that the enemy's guns, elevated by the
pressure of the gale upon her windward side, sent their missiles high
between the upper spars of the merchantman. The _Cristobal_, however,
was hulled by two balls, and had her tiller carried away by a third;
for, just as her guns were elevated to harmlessness by the list of the
deck, so were the merchantman's depressed to a deadly aim by the list of
hers.

Taking every advantage which a sound tiller and perfectly trimmed sails
gave her over her enemy, the _Heart of the West_ raced after the
buccaneer. Passing close astern, she raked her with her three larboard
guns. Running on, and slanting across the wind's course more and more,
she presently had her two after-guns to bear on the three-quarter target
of the _Cristobal's_ starboard side. The range was middling; but, even
so, the gunners sent up a prayer to Luck, so violent were the soarings
and sinkings of the deck. The shots were followed by a tottering of high
sails above the _Cristobal_, and with a flapping and rending, the
mizzenmast fell forward and stripped the main of three of her yards.

Now the disabled, tillerless _Cristobal_, kept before the wind by a
great sweep, fled heavily. Her decks were cluttered with snarled
wreckage. Half a dozen of her crew were injured. Her commander and
Master Silva were mad with rage at the unexpected turn of events.

Aboard the _Heart of the West_, Ouenwa had just pointed out to Kingswell
the dashing figure of Pierre d'Antons.

"I take it that this is his last play," remarked the young captain, with
a grim smile.

For another hour the merchantman sailed about the pirate at her will,
pouring broadside after broadside into hull and rigging, and sustaining
but little damage herself. Now and then musket-shots were exchanged. Two
of Kingswell's men were wounded, and were promptly carried below, where
their hurts were tenderly bandaged by Mistress Kingswell and Maggie
Stone.

In a lull of the firing, the cook came running to the poop, with word
that Trowley was in a fair way to make matchwood of his surroundings.

"What ails him now?" inquired Kingswell.

"He be shoutin' for a chance at the Frenchers," replied the cook.
Kingswell considered the matter, with a calculating eye on the enemy.
"Cast him loose," said he, "and give him a chance to prove himself an
English sailor man."

Trowley appeared on deck just as a shot from the _Cristobal_ struck the
teakwood rail of the _Heart of the West_ amidships. A flying splinter
whirred past his head. He brandished his cutlass, and bawled a threat
across the rocking water. The men at the guns welcomed him with laughter
and cheers.

"Ye be in for the kill, master," cried one.

Kingswell beckoned the ex-commander aft, and met him at the top of the
ladder. Trowley looked guiltily this way and that.

"I have let you up, my man," said the captain, "that you may bear a hand
in the fight. I am willing to forget your knaveries of the past, and
remember only your actions of to-day."

Trowley nodded, and for an instant his eyes met Kingswell's.

"You can see what we have done to the enemy," said the other. "But I am
in no mind to break her up with this everlasting cannonading. What would
you suggest?"

Trowley straightened his great shoulders and lifted his head. "Lay her
aboard, sir," said he, "an' make fast."




CHAPTER XXXVI.

OVER THE SIDE


With a fearful grinding of timbers and rattling of spars, the
merchantman's larboard bow scraped along the enemy's side.
Boarding-irons were thrown across from the forecastle-deck. With a yell,
the men of Devon sprang from rail to rail, and hurled themselves upon
the mongrels who clustered to repulse them. Cutlasses skirred in the
air; and some struck clanging metal, and some met with a softer
resistance. Screams of rage and pain, and shouts of grim exultation,
rang above the conflict.

Old Trowley hacked a place for himself in the thickest of the press, and
laid about him with such desperate fury and such fearful oaths that the
buccaneers hustled each other to get out of his way.

Kingswell, in the waist of the _Cristobal_, encountered D'Antons, and
claimed him for his own. As their blades rasped together, D'Antons began
the story of Sir Ralph Westleigh's death in the wilderness. Kingswell
heard it without comment. The tumult about them gradually subsided, as
man after man of the pirate crew was cut down or bound. Sail was
shortened on both vessels, and the victors, sound and wounded alike,
gathered about the two swordsmen. A strained silence took possession of
the watchers. The rough fellows understood that their captain had an old
score to settle with the buccaneer. They were fascinated by the
lightning play of the rapiers. They noted every movement of foot and
hand, blade and eye. When D'Antons snarled an insulting taunt at his
adversary, they cursed softly. When their captain pricked the pirate's
shoulder, a husky murmur of admiration went through them. So intent were
they on the fight that they failed to notice the approach of Miwandi,
the Beothic woman, until she was in their midst. But they became aware
of her presence when she screamed with rage and flung herself upon
Kingswell.

"Pull the wench off," they cried, and made a futile grab at the mad
figure.

Kingswell, quick as a cat for all his Saxon colouring, wrenched himself
clear of her, avoided the slash of her knife by a half-inch, and lunged
through D'Antons' guard. The buccaneer pitched forward so suddenly and
heavily that the rapier was wrenched from the Englishman's hand. The
hilt struck the deck. The slim blade darted out between D'Antons'
shoulders a full two-thirds of its length. He sprawled on his face,
gulping his last breath; and the hilt of Kingswell's weapon knocked
spasmodically on the red planking of the deck. The woman, stunned with
grief, was led away by two of the seamen.

By the time the duel was over, the long, northern twilight was drawing
to a close. The decks of the _Cristobal_ were cleared of the dead bodies
and the wreckage of guns and spars. The torn rigging was partially
repaired; a few sails were set; and the shattered tiller was replaced.
The prisoners (wounded and bound together, they did not number a dozen)
were divided between the ships. A prize-crew of seven, under the first
mate's command, went aboard the _Cristobal_. Then the boarding-irons
were cast loose, and the vessels fell away from each other to a safe
distance.

Miwandi's grief was desperate. Beatrix strove to comfort her, but failed
signally. Her position was evident enough to every one who had seen her
frantic attempt to assist D'Antons in the encounter with Kingswell.
Beatrix guessed the story. Her face burned at remembrance of her
one-time companionship with D'Antons--of the days before she fully knew
his nature, and often sat at cards and chess with him in the little
cabin in the wilderness--and of the days before that, when he was one of
her admirers in London. Even now she did not know him for her father's
murderer. Kingswell had decided to keep that to himself, until some day
in the happy future, when the wilderness should be fainter than the
memory of a dream in his wife's mind.

For three days the ships kept within sight of each other. On the fourth,
a gale of wind drove them apart; but Kingswell felt no anxiety for the
prize, for she had received no serious damage to her hull in the bitter
encounter that had befallen on his wedding-day.

Aboard the _Heart of the West_ the wounded improved daily; the prisoners
cursed their irons and their luck; the crew never pulled on a rope
without a song to lighten the task; old Trowley, promoted from
imprisonment to the position of second mate, worked like a Trojan, and
Beatrix and Bernard sped the hours in the high and golden atmosphere of
love and youth. The Beothic woman, however, felt no response in her
heart to the stir and happiness about her. Her world had fallen in a
desolation of emptiness, and her very soul was weary of the sequence of
day and night, night and day. She would not eat. She sobbed quietly,
without rest, in her darkened berth. Her ears were deaf to words of
comfort, even when they were spoken in her own language by Ouenwa. She
asked no questions. Ever since that first outbreak, at sight of her
lover's danger, she accepted the will of her pitiless gods without signs
of either anger or wonder.

One still night, when the waves rocked under the faint light of the
stars without any breaking of foam, and the wind was just sufficient to
swell the sails from the yards, the man at the tiller was startled from
his reveries by a splash close alongside. He called to the officer of
the watch, who had heard nothing, and told him of the sound. They
scanned the sea on all sides and listened intently. They saw only the
black, vanishing crests. They heard only the whispering of the ship on
her way.

"A fish," said the mate. The other agreed with him.

In the morning Miwandi's berth was discovered to be empty,--no trace of
her was found alow or aloft.

The remaining days of the passage slipped by without any especial
incident. Winds served. Seas were considerate of the good ship's
safety. No fogs endangered the young lovers' homeward voyage. Every
night there was fiddling in the forecastle and the chanting of rude
ballads. And sometimes in the cabin a violin sang and sang, as if the
very heart of happiness were under the sounding-board, and Love himself
in the strings.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE MOTHER


Dame Kingswell, the widow of that good merchant of Bristol whom Queen
Elizabeth had knighted in her latter days, sat in her chamber and looked
down upon a pleasant garden beneath the window. She was alone. Her
garments, though of rich materials, were sombre in hue. She wore no
personal ornaments save two rings on her left hand, and a chain of gold,
bearing a small cross of the same metal, at her breast. Her thick hair
was snow-white. In her youth it had been as black as her husband's had
been flaxen. Her complexion held scarcely more colour than her hair. On
her knees a book of devotional poetry, splendidly illuminated about the
margins, lay open. But her thin hands were folded over the page, and her
gaze was upon the shrubbery of the garden. The time was early evening.
The sunlight was mellow gold. The hedges, shrubs, and fountain on the
lawns threw eastward shadows.

The chamber in which the widow sat was large and scantily furnished. A
few portraits, by masters of the brush, hung along the walls. A
prayer-desk, with a red hassock before it, stood in a corner.

A light rapping sounded on the door. The lady turned her eyes from the
bright garden below her window. She saw the door open, and a beautiful
girl in cloak and hat enter the room. The stranger advanced quickly, in
a whispering of silks, and in her glowing hands took the widow's
bloodless fingers.

"My dear," said the elder woman, kindly, "I fear my memory is flitting.
I do not recall your winsome face. Can it be that you are one of Sir
Felix Brown's lasses, grown to such a fine young lady in London?"

The girl sank on her knees and kissed the pale hands lightly and
prettily.

"My name is Beatrix Kingswell," she murmured.

The good dame was sorely puzzled. She tried, in vain, to connect this
lovely creature with any branches of the late knight's family.

"Then you are a kinswoman of mine?" she queried. "Pray do not kneel
there, my dear. Come sit in the window and tell me who you are."

But the stranger did not move.

"I am your daughter," she said. "And--oh, do not swoon, my
mother--Bernard is at the door, awaiting your permission to enter."

The widow closed her eyes for a second, leaning back in her chair. She
recovered herself swiftly and clutched the skirts of the girl, who was
now standing, ready to run to the door and admit her husband.

"What story is this?" she cried, incredulous. "I have no daughter. And
Bernard, my son, has lain dead in a far land these weary months."

"Nay, dear madam," replied the girl. "Nay, he is not dead. But let me go
to the door, and you will see him with your own eyes. He waits at your
threshold, happy and well."

The older woman maintained her hold of her visitor's gown. "And who are
you, to bring me word of my son's return?" she asked, with a ring of
shrewdness and suspicion in her voice. Dimly, she feared that she was
affording sport to some heartless person; for this sudden tale of her
son's safety, brought by this gay young lady, had broken upon her
pensive reveries like an impossible scene out of a play.

"I am his wife," replied Beatrix. With an effort, she pulled her skirts
away from the clutching fingers, and sped to the door. Throwing it open,
she admitted Bernard. The youth sprang to where his mother sat, and
caught her up from her chair against his breast. With a glad,
inarticulate cry, she slipped her arms around his neck and clung
hysterically.


Five days after the arrival of the _Heart of the West_, the _Cristobal_
sailed into port. By that time the story of her capture was well known
in the town, and a crowd of citizens gathered on the docks to welcome
her. Master Kingswell put her up for sale. In the end, he bought her
himself, for something more than she was worth. Every penny of the money
Beatrix gave to the brave fellows who had fought and sailed their ship
so valorously on her eventful wedding-day. Only that rugged and wayward
master mariner, John Trowley, failed to show himself for a share of the
gold. He had not the courage to run a chance of another meeting with
Lady Kingswell.

Of the future of Bernard, Beatrix, and the lad Ouenwa, something is
written in the old records in an exceeding dry vein. Of the fate of the
little fort on Gray Goose River, little is known. Some chroniclers
maintain that the French overpowered it; others are as certain that the
settlers moved to Conception Bay, and there established themselves so
securely that, even to-day, descendants of those Triggets and those
Donnellys cultivate their little crops, cure their fish, and sail their
fore-and-afters around the coast to St. John's.

THE END.





End of Project Gutenberg's Brothers of Peril, by Theodore Goodridge Roberts

THE RED FEATHERS




INDIAN AND HUNTING STORIES FOR BOYS


COMRADES OF THE TRAILS
  By THEODORE GOODRIDGE ROBERTS
  Cloth decorative, illustrated by Charles Livingston Bull.      $1.50

  A breezy tale of adventures in the Canadian wilds.


FLYING PLOVER
  By THEODORE GOODRIDGE ROBERTS
  Cloth decorative, illustrated by Charles Livingston Bull.      $1.25

  A story of Indian life in Labrador.


THE RED FEATHERS
  By THEODORE GOODRIDGE ROBERTS
  Cloth decorative, illustrated by Charles Livingston Bull.      $1.50

  A story of remarkable adventures when the world was young.


RALPH SOMERBY AT PANAMA
  By FRANCIS RALEIGH
  Cloth decorative, illustrated.                                 $1.50

  A story of adventures with the Indians, Spaniards and roving pirates
  in the 16th century.


HAWK: THE YOUNG OSAGE
  By C. H. ROBINSON
  Cloth decorative, illustrated.                                 $1.25

  A story of Indian life and adventures in the 15th century.


LONGHEAD
  By C. H. ROBINSON
  Cloth decorative, illustrated.                                 $1.00

  An interesting book of prehistoric times.


THE YOUNG MOOSE HUNTERS
  By C. A. STEPHENS
  Cloth decorative, illustrated by Frank T. Merrill.             $1.25

  A stirring story of adventures in the wilds of Maine.


  THE PAGE COMPANY
  53 BEACON STREET, BOSTON, MASS.




[Illustration: SPED HERE AND THERE THROUGH THE AIR, SWIFT AS A CHASING
HAWK
                                                       (_See page 25_)]




  The Red Feathers

  A Story of Remarkable Adventures
  When the World Was Young

  By Theodore Roberts

  AUTHOR OF BROTHERS OF PERIL, HEMMING THE ADVENTURER, ETC.

  _ILLUSTRATED AND DECORATED BY_
  Charles Livingston Bull

  [Illustration]

  Boston         The Page
  Company      Publishers




  _Copyright, 1907_
  BY L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
  (INCORPORATED)

  _Entered at Stationers Hall, London_

  _All rights reserved_

  Second Impression, June, 1908
  Third Impression, January, 1913
  Fourth Impression, December, 1915
  Fifth Impression, September, 1919

  THE COLONIAL PRESS
  C. H. SIMONDS CO., BOSTON, U. S. A.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                         PAGE

        I. RUN-ALL-DAY                                             1

       II. THE TWO RED FEATHERS                                      7

      III. THE LITTLEST WARRIOR AND HIS SUMMER HOME                 15

       IV. BRIGHT ROBE TELLS A STORY OF THE RED FEATHERS            20

        V. RUN-ALL-DAYS NEW-FOUND AMBITION                         30

       VI. RUN-ALL-DAY VISITS WHISPERING GRASS                      38

      VII. BRIGHT ROBE FINDS HIS ENEMY                              47

     VIII. THE YOUTH RECOVERS HIS STRENGTH AND VISITS RUN-ALL-DAY   56

       IX. THE LITTLE BROWN OWL HUNTS FOR FOOD                      73

        X. THE LITTLE BROWN OWL HAS MORE TROUBLE                    81

       XI. THE MAGIC LODGE                                          90

      XII. THE ADVENTURE OF JUMPING WOLF                           100

     XIII. RUN-ALL-DAY AGAIN MAKES USE OF THE RED FEATHERS         112

      XIV. THE GOOD MAGICIAN VISITS RUN-ALL-DAYS NEW VILLAGE      124

       XV. THE LITTLEST WARRIORS GREAT PROSPECTS                  136

      XVI. FURTHER ADVENTURES OF THE LITTLE BROWN OWL              143

     XVII. A BRIEF RETURN TO POWER                                 153

    XVIII. THE MAKER OF CHIEFS                                     168

      XIX. THE THEFT OF THE RED FEATHERS                           178

       XX. A JOURNEY TO THE MAGIC FOREST                           189

      XXI. THE QUEST OF THE FEATHERS                               202

     XXII. WISE-AS-A-SHE-WOLF AND CRACK BONE THE GIANT             213

    XXIII. HOW CRACK BONE WAS DOUBLY OUTWITTED                     220

     XXIV. THE MAGICIANS AWAKE                                     229

      XXV. THE UNFINISHED BATTLE                                   238

     XXVI. BRIGHT ROBES DISCRETION                                249

    XXVII. THE DIPLOMACY OF BRIGHT ROBE                            257

   XXVIII. THE QUEST                                               269

     XXIX. PEACE                                                   278

      XXX. THE POISONED DART                                       288

     XXXI. THE FREEZING OF THE NARROW SEA                          297

    XXXII. THE INVASION OF THE ISLAND                              304

   XXXIII. THE RESCUE OF STAR FLOWER                               315

    XXXIV. REST                                                    319




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
                                                                  PAGE

  SPED HERE AND THERE THROUGH THE AIR, SWIFT AS
    A CHASING HAWK (_See Page 25_)                     _Frontispiece_

  A GREAT STAG CARIBOU, AS HIGH AS A PINE, HAUNTED
    THE WILDS                                                       1

  THE ASTONISHED BUNNY HAD DEALT HIM A SHREWD
    BLOW WITH ONE OF HIS BIG HIND LEGS                             75

  HERE A GOD STOOD HUGE AND BLACK AGAINST A SUNSET
    SKY, LOOKING OUT ACROSS A DARKENING WORLD                      95

  HE SPRANG ASIDE INTO THE SHELTER OF A TREE
    TRUNK, AND PEERED BACK ALONG THE WAY HE HAD COME              105

  RED EYE UNTIED THE OPENING OF HIS WIGWAM, AND
    THE OWL FLOATED FROM HIS PERCH                                154

  HE CLIMBED A HIGH TREE AT THE EDGE OF THE WOOD                 199

  THE HEAD AND SHOULDERS OF THE GIANT IMMEDIATELY
    APPEARED, AND FROM UNDER A FRINGE OF TANGLED HAIR A
    PAIR OF ALERT EYES, GRAY AS ICE, GLARED ABOUT                 213

  THEY PASSED BENEATH HIM, WHITE AS FROST AND DEATH              272




[Illustration: A GREAT STAG CARIBOU, AS HIGH AS A PINE, HAUNTED THE
WILDS.]




THE RED FEATHERS




CHAPTER I

RUN-ALL-DAY


In the days of which I write, in the island now known as Newfoundland,
men made prayers to the sun, the winds, the frost and the stars. They
believed that giants lived in the north; that a great stag caribou, as
high as a pine, haunted the wilds beyond the Narrow Sea to the west;
that gods moved about in divers shapes, doing good or evil as their
natures prompted them, and that certain wise and crafty men acquired
a knowledge of magic and thereby became stronger than the greatest
warriors. Fog, to these people, was the breath of an old god who lived
to the eastward, just beneath the rim of the sea; and fire was a
spirit,--the offspring of a god,--that sometimes was content to feed on
the fagots cut for it, cooking food for men and warming their bodies,
and sometimes leaped into the woods and consumed the forest for miles
in an outburst of fury.

A man of the Beothic race named Run-all-day had a lodge on the River of
Three Fires, about half-way between its mouth and Wind Lake. There he
lived only in the warmer months of the year. At the approach of winter
he followed the great herds of caribou farther inland and southward,
to the deeper forest and more sheltered barrens. During the summer he
netted and speared the salmon in the River of Three Fires, feeding
himself and his family on the flesh and smoking what could not be used
then for their winter supply. Early in October, before starting on the
inland journey, his wife and children gathered nuts and berries, while
he hunted the fat caribou, which were already gathering in great herds
preparatory to moving to the more sheltered feeding-grounds. With the
venison and the berries his wife, Red Willow, made a rough sort of
pemmican.

Run-all-day was fleet of foot and strong of wind and leg. It was by
his speed and endurance when a boy that he had won his name. He had
also proved himself a warrior of prowess, when occasion demanded, and
might have followed his father as chief of a clan; but the islanders
happened to be entering on a long term of peace when he grew to
manhood, so he took a wife from another village and journeyed away from
his family. His wits were not as quick as his legs and he entertained
no great ambitions of distinguishing himself. He was quite content to
protect and provide for his family--to sleep warm and eat his fill all
the year round and see them do the same. Of course, sometimes at the
tail-end of a bad season, provisions ran low; but if any man could find
game and bring it to the ground, it was Run-all-day.

On a certain June evening, when the west was red and dusk was settling
along the edges of the woods, Run-all-day withdrew his net of raw-hide
thongs from a big pool four miles above his wigwam and seated himself
on the grassy bank for a few minutes rest before walking home.
Nine great silver fish lay beside him--a respectable load even for
Run-all-day. To lessen their weight he had already slit them from
throat to tail, with his flint knife, and tossed the entrails into the
bushes. He was well satisfied with his afternoons work, and sighed
with contentment and a pleasant weariness.

It has been a good summer, he murmured, and there will be plenty
of food for all of us. He smiled at that thought, for his family had
increased by one within the past week.

You are a fortunate man, Run-all-day, said a voice at his shoulder.

In the fraction of a second the salmon fisher was turned and on his
feet, with the flint blade with which he had cleaned the fish ready in
his hand. His eyes encountered those of a young man who stood not ten
feet distant, with his back to the dusky forest. The strangers tunic
of dressed deer-skin was decorated with strings of polished stones. On
his feet were finely worked moccasins and in his hand a short spear.
His face was very kind. To a keener reader of mankind than Run-all-day
it would have suggested the hope and faith of a child, the wisdom that
comes of experience and the charitable spirit of old age.

Though I may be a stranger to you, said the young man, smiling, I am
not your enemy. You need not threaten me with the knife, oh, tireless
runner.

Run-all-day tossed his weapon beside the dead fish and looked steadily
at the other.

You do not belong to this river, chief, said he, and yet you call me
by my name. Is my reputation so great in the world?

To those who have ears to hear of an honest man, replied the
stranger, your reputation has travelled far. How is the little warrior
that came to your lodge but five days ago?

He is well and sound, answered Run-all-day. But what do you know of
him? he asked, in wonder. Are you a god?

You put the question honestly, said the young man with the spear.

He stepped close to the salmon fisher.

I am not a god, he said. I am even of your own clan. I am called
Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

Run-all-day looked at him in open astonishment, for the name of
the great magician was known far and wide. Some people held that
Wise-as-a-she-wolf was stronger than several of the gods themselves;
that he was the greatest student of magic since the days of the wicked
Bright Robe; that his magic had been learned in the Crimson Wigwam and
in the White Lodge beyond the ramparts of eternal ice; that the secrets
of immortality and everlasting youth were his. And yet twas said that
for all his power, his heart was kind as a young girls.

Great chief, said the salmon fisher, at last, I had thought to see,
in Wise-as-a-she-wolf, a full-grown man.

So be it, friend, replied the other, and, in the twinkling of an eye,
a warrior of great stature and grim visage stood before Run-all-day.

Have mercy, great chief, cried the fisherman of the River of Three
Fires. He was strong and courageous; but he had a dread of big magic.

Have no fear of your kinsman, laughed the other; and, in the next
second, the youth with the gentle face laid a reassuring hand on
Run-all-days shoulder. The gigantic warrior was gone.




CHAPTER II

THE TWO RED FEATHERS


I am hungry and weary, said Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

My cooking-pot is full, replied the other, and I have many soft
skins for bedding; but I fear me, chief, that to sleep in my lodge you
will first have to practise magic on the throat of the new warrior, or
on your own ears.

Nay, friend, a couch in the open will suit my taste, replied the
youth. So that the young warrior is not in pain, let him yell. Tis
the great spirit of him giving voice against the littleness of his body
and the weakness of his legs.

So they set out for the fishermans wigwam, each carrying a load of the
silver fish. The cooking-fire was burning brightly when they stepped
from the woods, and the slender form of Singing Bird, eldest child of
Run-all-day and Red Willow, was seen bending above the tree stump, that
had been hollowed to serve as a pot, which stood near the fire. The
stew in the pot was boiling vigorously, for the girl had dropped stones
into it which she had first heated near to the bursting-point among
the coals of the fire. Two smaller figures--and these of boys--skipped
about in the ruddy glow and shouted that they were quite ready for
their meal; still another was seen dabbling in the shallow water at the
edge of the river; and from the interior of the pointed lodge sounded
the crying of an infant.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf let his string of fish slip to the grass, and looked
at the scene before him with something of amusement and something of
consternation in his face.

A fine family, he remarked. And surely that littlest warrior has the
voice of a great chief.

Run-all-day was highly delighted at these words, being as foolish in
such matters as are the fathers of our own time. With a self-satisfied
grunt, he led the stranger to a seat by the fire and fetched him a bark
cup full of spring water, that he might quench his thirst before eating.

The magician ate very little for a hungry youth, and yet the stew was
excellent. Before he touched the food, he was seen to cast aside from
his waist a girdle of white leather painted with many wonderful figures
of gods and men and beasts. He slept well that night, on a couch of
bear skins, in the shelter of a spruce which stood midway between the
lodge and the fire. He was awakened, in the early morning, by the
voice of Singing Bird. Opening his eyes, he beheld her busy at the
cooking-fire, singing as she worked.

The breakfast was as good as the evening meal; and the magician,
pointing to the belt which hung loosely above his hips, said, You are
fortunate, my friend. You have no need, with such a cook, of a magic
Hunger-Belt like this. His gaze rested kindly on Singing Bird.

But the meat must first be caught, chief, replied Run-all-day.

When Wise-as-a-she-wolf was ready to continue his journey, the
fisherman walked from the camp with him, for a short distance.

I am going northward, said the magician, on very urgent business. I
have had dealings with many great people--even with the gods--and so
I have awakened envy in more than one dark heart. For all my magic,
friend, my life is not so good a one as yours. You love and are loved.
You keep your family fed and are at peace with the world. No evil magic
is worked against you and the wrath of the gods is aimed so high that
it goes over your head. I have my days of glory and my victories; but
strange weapons are ever being shaped for my undoing.

Yes, chief, I am content with my humble life, replied Run-all-day.

The young man placed two small red feathers in the others hand.

These are for the littlest warrior, he said. They are great
magic--great for good or evil, as the heart prompts. When he is large
enough to run here and there, place one of these feathers in each of
his moccasins, flat on the sole of his foot. Let him cherish them, for
they will help him in his play, and, later, in the chase, and they have
the power to save him even from death.

At the last word he stepped aside from the trail and was gone, with no
more noise than the slipping away of a shadow.

Run-all-day continued to stare at the spot where Wise-as-a-she-wolf had
so lately stood, for fully a minute. This magic was no light thing.
Courageous though he was, his legs shook under him as if with cold. A
dozen sea-eagles could not have made him flinch; but he trembled at
the touch of the two little feathers in his hand.

He is a great man, he said at last, and possessed of wonderful
magic; but perhaps he was not wise in his gift to the littlest warrior.
Magic is for gods and mighty chieftains; it is too potent a thing for
humble folks like me and mine. Did he not say himself, but a moment
ago, that power breeds powerful enemies and that even the gods bend
their ears to the affairs of magicians?

He gazed fearfully at the bright feathers in his hand.

He is a great chief; a kind and a good young man, a cousin of the
gods, I do not doubt,--but I fear he has made a mistake. He has been
too generous.

He let the feathers fall from his hand to the moss at the side of the
trail, turned quickly and hastened back to the clearing and the lodge.

He found Red Willow lying on a couch of soft skins, well and happy.
Old Blowing Fog, her mother, squatted beside her with the baby in her
wrinkled arms.

The stranger has gone, said Run-all-day. He is a great magician and
his name is Wise-as-a-she-wolf. But he envied me my humble contentment,
for all of that. He gave me two red feathers, for a gift for that
little warrior, and said that they are possessed of magic power; and
then he was gone, like the first whiff of smoke from a newly lighted
fire.

Where are the feathers? inquired Red Willow, her face aglow with
interest.

The brave shook his head and smiled wisely.

The gift was meant well, he said; but a man must judge of some
things for himself, even if he be but a hunter and fisherman. Magic may
be well enough for the great men whose feet are set in high places;
though I think even they would be safer without it. They may hunt with
the gods and the north-lights if they please; but the meat of the
caribou and beaver is better suited to my taste.

And what does all this grand talk lead to? asked old Blowing Fog.

I dropped the feathers on the ground and let them lie, said the man.

Then what do I see in your belt? asked the old woman, peering between
half-closed lids.

Run-all-day put his hand to his leather girdle--and drew out the two
red feathers. He gasped. His swarthy cheeks turned white as the bark of
the birch. Had one of those little, fat savages from the frozen west
(who sometimes crossed the Narrow Sea and fought with the islanders)
appeared and stuck a spear into his flesh, he could not have looked
more horrified.

Give them to me. I do not fear their magic, cried Red Willow.

Run-all-day obeyed her with a sigh of relief. He would face the
magician himself--but those little, slim, red feathers--ah, they made
his blood run cold as ice. Red Willow took them fearlessly and admired
their bright colour; and yet she was in the habit of fleeing, with
covered head, from bats flickering in the twilight. She laughed at her
big, trembling husband.

It is foolish to throw away a gift, she said. And it is even more
foolish to run away from two little feathers that were given you by a
friend.

Old Blowing Fog laughed, as she rocked the baby in her arms.

When I was young we saw greater magic than that, almost every day,
said she. My father once worked such magic on his bow that it shot
the arrows so high into the air that they never came down.

But Ive heard that he couldnt shoot a standing caribou, for all
that, replied the man, recovering something of his assurance. He often
argued with Blowing Fog.

Give me honest arrows, honest muscles and honest feathers sticking in
the tails of honest birds, he continued. I do not need any magic, old
or new, to keep the pot full of meat and fish and the rain out of my
lodge. And Id feel like a fool shooting my arrows so high in the air
that theyd never come down.

Both the women laughed at him.

Oh, I am wiser than you think, said he, and stalked out of the lodge.
But he left the two magic feathers in Red Willows hand.




CHAPTER III

THE LITTLEST WARRIOR AND HIS SUMMER HOME


The home in which the baby had been born was only a hut, built of
poles and sheets of bark. It was a fine house, though, for the time
and country. Its door was the hide of a caribou,--and how fearfully
that great hide flapped and bulged inward at the pressure of the night
winds. Fortunately the season was June, when the air was warm and the
sun shone almost every day.

When the littlest warrior was a few weeks old, he was put into a bag of
furry skins fastened to a light framework of wood. In this he rested
all day, in an upright position, sometimes against one of the poles of
the lodge, and sometimes on the back of his mother, or Blowing Fog, or
little Singing Bird.

He was a good baby, crying only when he was very hungry or when he was
bathed in the cold water of the river. He spent the greater part of his
time in sleep. Even when awake he did not seem to take much interest
in what went on around him; but this indifference to the world was
apparent in him only in his earliest days. At the age of two months
he began to show signs (so said his mother and Blowing Fog) of an
exceptional spirit and intellect; but, to the casual observer, it would
have seemed that he but howled with a more powerful voice and kicked
and struggled with lustier limbs.

It was only during the summer months--from May to October--that
Run-all-day and his family lived in the little clearing beside the
River of Three Fires. There was no other wigwam within ten miles of
them; for at this time the small tribes, or clans, of the north and
south, the east and west, were at peace with one another and so the
people did not have to band together, in villages, in self-defence.
Sometimes, during the summer, people of their own tribe passed up or
down the stream in front of their lodge, in skin-covered canoes of
unwieldy shapes.

Many of Run-all-days friends spent the summer months on the coast
of the great sea-bays, where they caught cod-fish to cure for winter
use. Some lived close to the great salt water all the year round, and
slaughtered a few of the hosts of seals that floated down from the
north, on the grinding ice-floes, early in the spring. Others, like
Run-all-day, pitched their summer lodges on the rivers and ponds,
moving southward and further inland, with the great herds of caribou,
at the approach of winter.

The hunting of the caribou began early in September, when the calves
of that year had grown strong enough to live independently of their
mothers. Several of the families returning from the bays, halted for
awhile in their journey and joined Run-all-day in the chase. Now the
youngest baby heard more noise than usual. Strange faces bent above him
and strange arms lifted him to feel his weight. Several cooking-fires
burned before the lodge; canoes of many models were drawn up on the
bank; everybody seemed to be happy and busy. But soon the caribou began
to travel southward, across the great barrens and through the low, dark
timber. Then dried fish and meat, skins and weapons were made into
packs, and canoes were launched and headed up stream.

Now the littlest warrior opened his eyes with more concern for the
everyday affairs of life. He cried less than ever before in his brief
career and smiled more readily. Even when he was placed in a canoe,
still in his fur bag, beside his mother, he did not make any violent
signs of objection. His father and all the family effects were at his
back. Close in front sat his three small brothers, and Singing Bird,
and in the bow old Blowing Fog plied a broad paddle.

Fortunately for all concerned, the canoe was both large and strong and
steady--a masterpiece among canoes. Run-all-day had built it during the
previous winter. He had planned a model for the frame to suit the size
of his family and had constructed it of light, well-seasoned spruce.
Being short of hides at the time, he had covered the frame with great
sheets of tough, white bark from the birch trees of the forest. This
bark was much lighter than caribou hides, and he had felt angry with
himself for never having thought to use it before in boat building.
For years, he had known that it was proof against water, for had it
not sheltered him ever since his birth, from rain and sleet? He had
stitched the seams with root-fibres and daubed them thoroughly with a
mixture of gum and fat.

Run-all-days friends had laughed at the new canoe and its builder, and
had advised the brave not to venture on the river in so novel a craft.
The whole world, they said, covered its canoes with skin; then why
should he do otherwise? But Run-all-day had hardened his heart against
their warnings and jeers and gone his own way; and it had proved to be
a right way.

Now a little fleet of six canoes toiled steadily up the river. Though
Run-all-days craft was larger and more heavily loaded than any, it
soon outdistanced them all. The brave, standing upright in the stern,
used a long pole and Blowing Fog dug vigorously at the water with her
broad paddle. Sometimes swift rapids churned and snarled in front of
them, defying them to ascend. Then all the bundles of fish and meat and
skins, the weapons and the children, had to be unloaded. Then the canoe
was lifted from the stream and carried along the shore, to the top of
the swift water, by Run-all-day and Blowing Fog. Everyone but the baby
helped to portage the cargo.

Shortly after sunset, Run-all-days canoe was run ashore at the edge
of a little meadow, again unloaded and lifted out of the water. Soon a
fire was lighted and the comforting fragrance of broiling venison stole
wide on the air. Dusk had fallen by the time the other voyagers reached
the camp.




CHAPTER IV

BRIGHT ROBE TELLS A STORY OF THE RED FEATHERS


The men of the party sat late around the fire, telling stories of
prowess at the fishing and in the chase. Some of them even talked of
the battlefield, for they were all of one clan. They had been at war
with the people of the south and southwest, not many years before.
Run-all-day was no more backward in story-telling than in other
matters. He was a skilled and tireless hunter, and he did not object
to the fact becoming known to the general public. Simply, he praised
his birch-bark canoe; his speed and endurance in running down a wounded
deer; his summers work at the fishing; even his wife and his family
were bragged about--and surely no one had ever before possessed such an
admirable mother-in-law. Some of the braves grunted at that, for they
knew that Run-all-day and old Blowing Fog often disagreed on household
matters.

Suddenly one of the cod-fishers, who was called Lazy Bear, threw a
large piece of drift-wood into the heart of the fire. Sparks and flames
shot upward, and, for a few seconds, the whole camp was lit by the
redoubled radiance.

And there, at one end of the semi-circle of braves, sat a stranger with
a robe of bright fur on his back. A gasp of astonishment arose from the
fishers and hunters. Lazy Bear almost stepped into the fire, in the
first flash of amazement. A dozen hands went to the hafts of clubs and
flint knives.

Good evening to you, chief, said Run-all-day, in a voice that was not
altogether steady.

But the stranger made no reply, and the man nearest him edged away to
the left.

Have you no tongue? cried Run-all-day, with anger in his voice. Anger
always ate up fear, in the breast of the salmon fisher.

The stranger raised his head and stared at the speaker with dark and
glowing eyes. But he did not open his lips. His piercing, insolent gaze
would have daunted a weaker man than Run-all-day; but it only stirred
the great hunters anger to higher flame, even as the drift-wood had
worked upon the smouldering heart of the fire.

If you have no tongue, said Run-all-day, make us a sign. You have
come, unbidden, to our camp. The haft of my club itches in my hand.

Brave words, said the stranger, in a voice cold as a wind off the ice
floe. Lift your club,--if you can.

Run-all-days weapon lay beside him on the moss of the little clearing.
His right hand closed on the stick and he made a slight effort to
swing the stone head upward, over his shoulder. He turned and applied
both hands and all his strength to the task. But the stone head of the
weapon that was usually like a toy in his hands, would not leave the
ground. A sweat of fear burst out on him and he loosed the haft of the
club as if it were red hot. A thrill of apprehension went through the
semi-circle of braves, at sight of their comrades half-seen actions.

The stranger laughed without mirth.

Great hunter, great slayer and smoker of salmon, when next Bright
Robe comes to your camp and honours you by taking a seat at your fire,
refrain from clamouring for explanations, he said.

The name of Bright Robe drove the last sparks of courage and anger from
the breasts of Run-all-days companions. Run-all-day, however, felt
the sullen rage still alive under the outward chill of fear.

You have heard of me, continued the unwelcome guest, and of this
robe, which is made of the pelt of one wolf--of one of the great, white
wolves that hunt under the north-lights, in the land of eternal ice.

True, they had all heard of Bright Robe, the master of magicians. Their
mothers had frightened them, when they were children, with tales of his
fearful and wonderful doings; and they, in their turn, had heard the
stories from their mothers and grandmothers. Legend recorded that, in a
fit of anger, he had once defied a god; and many were the versions of
the tale of his punishment. But he had vanished from the island, and
that was the great thing, for he had been the most wicked as well as
the most powerful of all the magicians that had practised their arts
since the beginning of the world. And now, after a hundred summers of
banishment, here he sat by the fire of honest hunters and fishermen,
with the silver robe gleaming on his shoulders. Was he stronger than
the gods themselves?

Even the courage of Run-all-day melted again. What had brought this
awful visitor to their humble fire?

Several members of the party hastened to bring food and water to the
great magician, who ate ravenously.

I have made a weary journey, said he, at last. I have spent eight
days in travelling a distance that, had I not been robbed, I should
have accomplished in a few hours. I, who owned the red feathers but a
moon ago, bruised my feet on rocks and roots like any common fellow.

Run-all-day stood beyond the smoke of the fire and so Bright Robe did
not notice the sudden alertness of the hunters face and body.

What are these red feathers, mighty chief? inquired Lazy Bear, who
possessed curiosity to the extent that he lacked energy.

Food had mollified the magicians spirit. The red feathers, said he,
are articles of great magic. The man who wears them against his feet
can outrace the flying hawk, and only he who wears the moccasins of the
wind can overtake him in the air.

I have heard old people talk of the magic moccasins that carry a man
with the speed of a flying teal, but I have heard no stories of the
red feathers, said Run-all-day.

He spoke in a voice that showed no more than a polite interest in the
subject.

Many stories are told of the moccasins, said Bright Robe, for they
have changed hands many times, but have never left this country, in
hundreds of years, for more than two moons. The red feathers, however,
are not known to the old story-tellers. Maybe they have thought that
all the swift running was done by the moccasins of the wind. It was in
the time of the coldest winter, when the Narrow Sea was bound with ice
from shore to shore, that the red feathers came into the possession
of a chief of this country. Mountaineers from the hills under the
setting sun crossed the Narrow Sea--and with them came many of those
fierce little men of the north--and did battle with the nations of this
island. The leader of the invaders sped here and there in the air,
swift as a chasing hawk, swooping and slaying like a hawk among grouse.
To every man he killed, terror was burned into the hearts of a score.
Our warriors had no strength to bend their bows against him, or hurl
their war-clubs, when they heard the whisper of his flying feet. But
one man kept his courage alive and his eyes ready. His was a strong
bow, and his arrows were long and sharply barbed. Slipping from the
central tumult of the battle, he crouched beneath a spruce tree and
peered about for the flying enemy as a hunter looks out of cover for
homing geese. Suddenly he saw the terrible one flash down upon the
struggling warriors; saw him strike once, and twice, and leap into the
air again. With lessened speed he drew near the spruce tree under which
the Beothic chief crouched ready. The bow bent and sprang straight,
and, with a fearful cry, the man of the flying feet struggled in the
air. Another arrow whined and struck--and another found its mark--and
then the terrible invader fell, like a stone, to the earth. And, in the
moccasins of the warrior from across the Narrow Sea, the chief who slew
him found the red feathers.

The men around the fire had followed the story with breathless
interest. For the time being, their fear of the narrator was forgotten.

The coldest winter was many hundreds of seasons ago, said one, and
never since then has our country been in such danger. It must have been
a mighty battle.

It was a mighty battle, replied Bright Robe. I was young then--I am
older than I look--and had learned nothing of magic. I fought in the
battle, for I was born in the tribe that dwells on the coast of the
Narrow Sea.

Was it you, great chief, who slew the leader of the enemy? asked
Run-all-day.

Nay, replied the magician, with a low chuckle. But two days after
the invaders were driven away from our shores, out onto the ice that
was already weakening and breaking, I took the red feathers from the
moccasin of that great chief and put them in my own.

Then he must have been sleeping, said Run-all-day.

A sound sleep, in truth, replied Bright Robe, calmly.

You killed him--a chief of your own tribe--for the magic feathers,
cried the hunter.

Verily, oh smoker of fish and flesh, replied the magician. And many
another have I killed, for less than those red feathers. To regain
possession of them now I should consider the speeding of an hundred
lives a niggardly payment.

We know nothing of the feathers, cried an old man.

Others confirmed the statement, in broken words and tremulous gestures.

Bright Robe sneered. You may save your breath, said he. No cleaner
of cod stole the prize from the feet of Bright Robe; of that, I need no
assurance. Only the gods, and Wise-as-a-she-wolf, have the hardihood
to strike at me. Even now I am on the trail of my enemy. It will be
a long trail, for he has both the moccasins of the wind and the red
feathers--but when one knows the secret of everlasting life one can
afford to travel slowly.

He looked about him with his dark, glowing eyes. The braves at the fire
felt their muscles loosen under the awful glance.

Now bring me thirty days food, dried meat and smoked fish enough
to last a man thirty days, he ordered. I do not intend to delay my
journey for the purpose of killing caribou, he added.

Run-all-day and his companions were glad enough that the magician asked
for so little. They hastened to bring the best of their meat and fish
and pemmican. They heaped it near their unwelcome visitor, in the light
of the fire.

Now bind it securely into one pack, he ordered.

When this was done he arose from the ground and, bending over the great
pack, laid his hand on it. In a moment it had dwindled to the size of
a crouching wolf--to the size of a mans head--to the smallness of a
hazel nut. And this tiny object he picked up, between finger and thumb,
and tucked somewhere under his belt.

You are worthy people, he said, looking around, well pleased at the
wonder, fear, and admiration written on the faces of the hunters.

Now I continue my journey, he added. See, I draw my robe of white
fur over my head so that not a man of you shall be able to say which
way I went.

At the last word he drew the robe above his shoulders--and lo, the
fearful magician was nowhere to be seen.

For hours the hunters continued to sit by the fire. They were afraid
that Bright Robe might still be lurking near them, to hear what they
had to say of him. So they praised him warmly to each other, until they
could not keep their eyelids open another minute.




CHAPTER V

RUN-ALL-DAYS NEW-FOUND AMBITION


Wind Lake was entered early in the evening of the second day of the
journey. The voyagers did not land at sunset, but continued to paddle
up the long, narrow lake until they reached a point on the western
shore where a wooded valley opened on the water, between two wooded
hills. By the time all the canoes were unloaded and the people settled
for sleep, it was long past midnight.

This was the place where Run-all-day had spent the last four winters,
his lodge standing alone in that warm and sheltered valley, with an
outlook on the white lake, and with good hunting country on three
sides; but now the owners of the other canoes and families begged him
to allow them to build their winter lodges beside his.

Let us stay near you, said an old man named Green Bow on the morning
after their arrival. The visit of Bright Robe has filled us with
trembling, and our dreams with black visions. You are brave. You shall
be chief of the village and master of the chase, if only we may camp in
your valley and keep our hearts up with the sight of your courage; for
who can say at what time Bright Robe may visit us again?

My heart ran to water in the presence of Bright Robe, replied
Run-all-day. My muscles were no more than the muscles of a woman. I
did his bidding like a child and trembled at the sound of his voice.
And yet, he concluded, wonderingly, you ask me to inspire you with my
courage.

Your eyes remained steady, replied the old man. I think there was
still a flame of courage in the bottom of your heart.

Run-all-day looked from the old man to the others of the party, and
a new and delightful sensation took possession of him. Here was
recognition of his prowess, surely. They looked to him for protection
from the great and wicked magician. Well, he would do what he could, as
he had always done in humbler matters.

Friends, said he, I am willing to be your chief and to let you hunt
and live in this valley. But I am not a magician, and I greatly fear
that the courage of a hunter would prove of no avail against the evil
strength of Bright Robe. But, my friends, I am well liked by one who
does not fear Bright Robe. Wise-as-a-she-wolf has claimed me for a
relative; has partaken of my cooking-pot; has even made a gift to my
littlest warrior.

Now this was a trifle more than even Lazy Bear could believe. As for
old Green Bow, he frowned at Run-all-day. This is a new thing to our
ears, he said. May I ask, chief, how long it is since you began to
keep such fine company?

The new-made chief was stung to anger.

You do not believe my word, he cried. Then I will give you proof of
it.

He put his hand on Green Bows shoulder. Where did you have your
lodge, during the summer? he asked, sternly.

At the mouth of the River of Three Fires, on a knoll on the northern
shore, under three great pines, answered the old man.

And did you leave any familiar possession behind you?

The old man nodded.

I forgot my best skinning-knife, he replied. It is somewhere in my
wigwam, chief.

Then, said Run-all-day, gazing proudly around him at the puzzled
faces of his people, I shall start for the mouth of the river
to-night,--and in the morning the knife will be in your hand.

Ah-ha, cried Green Bow. Then you are a magician after all. Why did
you not lift your club, two nights ago, and deal Bright Robe a whack on
the head?

So you continue to doubt me, said Run-all-day. But I do not wonder
at that. I am an honest fisherman and hunter. I have no knowledge of
magic. But if I fail to bring you your knife by sunrise to-morrow, then
you may choose another chief and Run-all-day will take his family from
this valley and seek another home.

The braves were still incredulous. Though of great endurance and speed,
how could their comrade make a four days journey in one night?

Perhaps you have the moccasins of the wind hidden in your lodge? said
Lazy Bear.

Or the red feathers? suggested a youth named Little Fox.

Green Bow placed his fingers on his lips. Would you have Bright Robe
back again? he whispered, sharply. Keep your thoughts behind your
tongues, if your minds run on such things.

The old man is right, said Run-all-day. If I make a long journey in
the night-time, to prove to you that I still speak the truth, let not
so much as a hint of it go beyond the warriors of this new village.

Run-all-day worked busily with the others, at the building of the
lodges. But the furtive glances and whisperings of his companions
kept him in a bad humour; and thought of the awful journey he had so
boastfully undertaken, weighed on his spirit. He did not doubt, for a
moment, the ability of the red feathers to take him to the mouth of
the river and home again; but fear of the terrific speed and the great
magic gripped his heart.

When the evening meal was finished and the warriors began to draw
around the central fire, the new chief entered his lodge and whispered
his trouble in the ear of Red Willow.

You may not withdraw from your promise, she said. If these are truly
the magic feathers they will not fail you. Fly high and straight, tarry
at Green Bows camp only long enough to find the knife, and return
without again alighting. It is well that you planned to make the
journey in the night-time; for, doubt not, sharp eyes would mark your
flight by day, eager tongues would carry word of it far and wide, and
the ears of powerful persons would hear of it. Now, since the visit of
Bright Robe, I, too, fear this gift for the littlest warrior. But it is
our duty to keep the feathers safely. Wise-as-a-she-wolf may need them
again. We must never allow them to pass into the hands of one of his
enemies.

Run-all-day placed one of the slim, red feathers in each of his
moccasins, with shaking fingers. Then, for several hours, he sat in the
lodge, listening to the chatter of his family, and struggling with the
fear that ran like ice in his veins. At last he stepped softly through
the doorway, followed by Red Willow. The night was black, unlit by any
star, and a low wind crawled in the tree-tops.

The woman pointed northward. That is the road, she whispered.

Run-all-day drew a deep breath, hesitated for a moment, and then sprang
into the air. He saw the dark mass of the forest under his feet, and
the glow of the camp-fire around which the warriors still sat. The four
quarters of the sky lay black and vast around him, and the prowling
wind blew against his moccasins. Then, with a second desperate
resolve, he ran northward along the currents of the air.

Dawn was breaking along the east when Run-all-day entered his lodge
with Green Bows knife in his hand. He was breathless. Snow had
commenced to fall when he had but begun his return journey, and he had
lost his way and been forced to descend twice to earth. He returned the
feathers to Red Willow with a sigh of relief.

When the sun crawled up in a clear sky, he stepped from the lodge and
approached the group of braves already assembled in the centre of the
encampment. The experience of the night had left a pallor on his face;
and every man noticed it.

You have not slept well, said old Green Bow, peering up at him with a
secret glance.

Have you worried about your good hunting-ground? inquired Little Fox.

For answer, Run-all-day took the knife from his belt and tossed it to
Green Bow.

Is that your wonderful skinning-knife? he asked, sharply.

The old man recovered the weapon from the ground, examined it closely
and uttered a hoarse cry of amazement. The others crowded around him;
only the chief held aloof.

It is the knife, cried one.

He left it at the mouth of the river, four days journey from here,
cried another.

I keep my promises, said Run-all-day, and stalked back to his lodge.




CHAPTER VI

RUN-ALL-DAY VISITS WHISPERING GRASS


The first winter of Run-all-days chieftainship passed quietly in the
wooded valley on Wind Lake. No magicians came to the little village,
and the magic feathers remained safe in Red Willows care. Between the
night of the chiefs great journey and the freezing of the lake, many
caribou were killed. Later, bear, and wolf, fox, marten, and wild-cat
fell to the spoil of the hunters. The women and larger children, and
the old men, worked at dressing the skins for robes and clothing, at
making arrows and bows and snow-shoes.

Run-all-days youngest child grew steadily, in the shelter of the
big lodge. In fine weather, Singing Bird often carried him about the
clearing and even out on the frozen lake. Old Blowing Fog made him a
coat of fox-skins to wear out-of-doors.

When spring came, and the snow melted on the barrens and dwindled in
the woods, and swollen waters and soft winds gnawed the floor of ice
that hid the lake, the baby in the chiefs lodge began to fret and
lose weight. Red Willow and Blowing Fog were good nurses and knew
something of the use of medicinal herbs; but, day by day, the little
warrior weakened.

Run-all-day hung about the lodge, anxious and helpless. On the morning
of the third day of the babys illness old Green Bow caught him by the
sleeve.

Whispering Grass is a good doctor, he said. She lives on the Highest
Hill, beyond this lake and Great Devils Lake, westward and southward.
For a warm cloak of marten skins she would give you medicine to cure
the little warrior. Three winters ago, when I was hunting in those
lands, she saved me from a fever that was eating my blood.

Three winters ago, exclaimed the chief. How do you know that she is
still there?

She will live nowhere else.

But she may be dead.

You will know, when you arrive at her lodge.

But it is a long journey, and the baby is very ill, cried Run-all-day.

You made a longer journey to bring me my knife, replied Green Bow.

Run-all-day turned from him and entered the lodge. Hope and resolve
shone in his eyes.

Give me the feathers, he whispered to Red Willow. I must make a long
journey, for medicine for the littlest warrior; and I may not wait for
the darkness to conceal my flight.

In a few seconds the red feathers were inside his moccasins, against
the soles of his feet. He bent above the sick child, where it lay in
the arms of Blowing Fog, and touched the colourless lips with his
fingers.

Keep a brave heart, little warrior. The gift of the good magician will
fight for you, he said.

He was about to step from the lodge when Red Willow detained him with a
gesture of the hand.

Should Bright Robe, or any friend of his, see you, he must not know
who it is that runs on the wind, she said, quietly lifting a long
garment of mink skins, almost black in colour, to his shoulders.

Belt it about you, she said, and draw the hood close around your
face.

Run-all-day obeyed her swiftly, then stepped from the lodge to the
outer brightness.

I go now in search of Whispering Grass, he said to Green Bow, who
stood without.

May good fortune attend you, replied the old man, staring with an
expression of awe at the chiefs feet.

Without more ado, Run-all-day faced west and south and sprang into the
air. Now the gleaming, sunlit wilderness lay soft and familiar under
his wide vision, and there was no fear in his heart save for the sick
child. With all his strength, he set his feet to the air and sped away
on his journey. The mottled expanse of Wind Lake was passed in a few
seconds. Rushing above the barrens beyond, he overtook and passed a
flying crow. He saw a wooded hollow, a few lodges in a little clearing,
and a boy gazing up at him, with astonished eyes, and it was as if he
had but looked down, for a moment, at a painted picture. He passed over
hills, his speeding feet almost brushing the crowded tree-tops. He saw
caribou, in vast herds, feeding and moving. They seemed no more than
toys made by an old woman.

Soon, Run-all-day saw Great Devils Lake in front of him. It was long
and narrow, and split for more than half its length by a slim, wooded
island. In some places the water already shone in dark pools among the
rotting ice. Beyond, stood a range of hills, from which one cone rose
higher than any mountain-top in sight. He did not doubt that this was
the hill of the medicine-woman; but his heart shook at the thought that
he might find there only a deserted lodge. As he approached the hill he
ascended into higher and rarer altitudes of air, eager to read the fate
of his journey in one sweeping glance.

Pausing in his flight, so high above the wilderness that the forests
looked like moss, he beheld a tiny wigwam half-way up the southern
slope of the hill, with a feather of smoke at its roof. Then, in great
circles ever descending, he swooped to the little clearing. Throwing
aside his robe of mink skins, he hastened to the door of the lodge and
peered within. He could only see the glow of a little fire, for his
eyes had narrowed against the vasts of sunlight.

Enter, chief, said an aged voice.

But Run-all-day stepped back a pace, still with his eyes on the black
interior of the lodge.

I seek Whispering Grass, the great doctor, he said.

I am Whispering Grass, replied the voice. Enter, chief, and tell
your errand.

By this time Run-all-day could make out the form of the old woman,
crouched above a pot near the fire. Assuring himself that no other
human being lurked in the shadows of the lodge he obeyed her summons. A
strange, bitter-sweet odour filled the wigwam, and all around, from the
sloping sides of bark, hung wisps of herbs and leaves.

Run-all-day told his name to the old woman, and that he had heard
of her from Green Bow. Then he asked for medicine for his baby, and
described the infants sickness as best he could.

And what will you pay, chief? she asked.

The question reminded him that he had forgotten to bring a gift of
furs, as Green Bow had suggested; but he bethought himself of the great
robe of mink skins which he had worn in the flight.

Get the medicine ready, he said, and I will fetch the gift. I left
it at the edge of the clearing.

And what is it? she asked, fixing her bright eyes on his face.

It is a great robe, made of fifty mink skins, he replied.

Good, she cried. Bring it quickly, so that the virtue of my
gratitude may enter into the medicine.

Run-all-day crossed the clearing in one step, having forgotten the
feathers in his moccasins. He returned more cautiously, with the robe
in his arms.

Whispering Grass was delighted with the gift. She spread it wide on the
ground and felt every inch of the fur with her wrinkled hands, crooning
all the while.

I am in a hurry, the chief reminded her. The child is near death.

At that the old woman set to work. She placed a small vessel of clay
near the fire, filled it with the liquor from the pot and added a few
crimson berries, some thread-like golden roots and a pinch of white
powder. She stirred the mixture with a stick. Her movements were very
deliberate.

Hurry! Hurry! exclaimed Run-all-day.

Whispering Grass did not so much as turn her head.

You should have the medicines already prepared, cried the brave.

At that, the old woman snorted defiantly, but continued stirring the
brew as slowly as ever. At last she set the vessel away from the fire.

Nobody but old Whispering Grass can make such fine medicine as that,
she mumbled. It is worth a hundred robes of mink skins.

If it cures the little warrior of his illness, then shall I give you a
hundred more robes like this, said Run-all-day.

Nay, chief, she replied. One will more than outlast my remaining
season of life. It is a rich gift. I have steeped my precious herbs,
before now, for no more than a few dried fish.

Is the medicine ready? inquired the chief.

Yes, but how will you carry it on so long a journey? asked the woman.

As it is, he replied, lifting the vessel of clay from the ground
and striding from the lodge. A hundred yards or so from the clearing,
he placed the precious medicine on a rock from which the snow had
melted. Then he tore a quantity of small, well-feathered branches from
the spruce trees within reach and fastened them about his body, for a
disguise. He bound them tightly with his leather belt. The branches
hung along his legs and stood above his shoulders.

Should any one see me on the homeward flight, he said, he will think
I am the father of all the eagles.

None of the precious liquor was spilled on the trip from the Highest
Hill to Wind Lake; in fact, it was scarcely yet cool when Run-all-day
stepped into his lodge.

Here is the great medicine, he said, and gave the clay vessel into
Blowing Fogs hands. Red Willow was holding the baby, who was lying
very still in her arms. The old woman seemed to know the medicine for,
after tasting it, she grunted with satisfaction. She dipped out some
of the liquid in a mussel shell and poured it between the infants
colourless lips.

My mother often made this same medicine, she mumbled. Had I but the
proper roots and herbs, I could brew it myself.

It pleased her, poor old soul, to treat every blessing as if it were
not quite as good as she was accustomed to. But her words fell on
heedless ears. Everyone was intent on the littlest warrior.

Close on the time of sunset, Run-all-day joined his people about the
fires. The colour has come back to his face, he said.

She is a good doctor, that old woman, said Green Bow, nodding. I am
glad you found her alive, chief.




CHAPTER VII

BRIGHT ROBE FINDS HIS ENEMY


Now it happened that Bright Robe, having wandered to the vicinity
of Great Devils Lake after months of fruitless searching for
Wise-as-a-she-wolf, saw Run-all-day, in his waving spruce-branches,
flying eastward from the hillside. Of course he thought it was his
rival, Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

He flies with the feathers, not the moccasins, he muttered, gazing
after the grotesque and fast-vanishing figure. Has he not enough magic
to make himself invisible? Or has he forgotten that I have returned to
my country? he added, viciously.

Knowing that it would be useless for him to try to follow the speeding
figure, even to keep it in sight, he bent his steps toward that part of
the hillside from which he had seen his supposed enemy rise into the
air. After a hard climb through the half-melted drifts, he arrived at
the lodge of Whispering Grass and found the old woman still crouched
by the fire.

Why have you come back? she asked, without looking up. Have you
spilled the medicine?

It is not Wise-as-a-she-wolf, to whom you speak, said the visitor.
It is Bright Robe.

She raised her head and stared at him intently. And does the great
Bright Robe, the defier of the gods, come to poor Whispering Grass for
medicine? she asked.

Nay, I want none of your mixtures, old woman, he replied, slipping
into the lodge. But I would know where Wise-as-a-she-wolf set out for,
a little while ago.

The woman smiled secretly, and stirred the pot by the fire. She knew
something of the history of both the magicians.

If that was Wise-as-a-she-wolf, he goes northward, she said.

I saw him flying eastward, old woman, cried the magician. It is
breath wasted that is employed in lying to Bright Robe, he added
sternly.

Flying? she queried.

You need not pretend to doubt it, answered the man. He flew like a
hawk--for the red feathers were in his moccasins. And he flew eastward,
across the lake. Had I seen him sooner, an arrow would have caught up
with him, I think.

Why did you not fly after him, great chief? she asked. His face
darkened with anger and his eyes glowed like coals in the dusk of the
wigwam.

He has both the moccasins of the wind and the red feathers, he
replied, harshly. He travels like a bird while I toil along the
ground; and yet, let me but stand within fifty strides of him and I
shall crush him as a child crushes a nut, he added, furiously.

Is not your power great enough to wing your own feet with magic?
asked Whispering Grass, shrewdly.

Bright Robe stepped forward, overturned the pot of medicine with his
foot, and then hurried from the lodge. He did not take the trouble
to draw his robe above his head and vanish, but stalked across the
clearing, slowly and disdainfully.

Whispering Grass snatched a bow and an arrow from the corner and
hobbled after the magician, muttering between tears and curses. She
caught the gleam of his robe between the dark trees; but, even as
she drew the bow, he turned and saw her. Quick as thought, he pulled
the magic robe high and stepped aside. In the next instant, the arrow
struck the trunk of a fir-tree, and stood quivering in the wood.

In truth, it was the great magician, cried the old woman, trembling
with fear, and peering anxiously about. He had vanished quicker than
the shifting of a sunbeam. She knew that her doom was sealed. A hundred
stories of the cruelty of Bright Robe, told to her when she was a
child, awoke in her mind. Not once, during his age-long life, had he
been known to forgive an injury.

Next moment, with awful suddenness the magician reappeared, close
beside her. His face was that of a devil. He let his silver robe fall
from his shoulders and raised his club high.

There sounded a swishing in the air, close above them. Then, with a
fierce, shrill cry, Bright Robe sprang aside, whirling his club around
him so swiftly that it drew gray circles in the sunlight. At the same
moment, he snatched for the silver fur which lay on the ground. Twice
he lifted a corner of it, and twice it was pulled away from him by
some invisible hand. Rage shone in his face like a fire, and horrible
sounds escaped from his lips.

The old woman managed to crawl to the edge of the wood; and there
she crouched, sobbing with terror and yet unable to remove her gaze
from the frantic scene. She realized that the cruel magician had been
attacked by some invisible power even while his club was raised to kill
her and that now he fought a terrific battle, handicapped by not being
able to see his antagonist. Her eyes and brain were keen, but her body
was numb; and so she continued to crouch, with the bow still held in
one withered hand.

At last the robe of white fur skin vanished from the ground. Its
owner dashed here and there in the sunlit clearing, roaring like a
wounded animal and slashing the air with his club. Suddenly he halted,
listening, then, with a shrill scream, he dashed toward the tree in
which stood the arrow Whispering Grass had shot at him. But before he
had crossed half the intervening space, the arrow vanished from the
tree trunk. Turning short, with a movement so powerful and quick as
to seem scarcely human, he sprang toward the old woman. Almost in the
same instant of time the bow was snatched from her hand, apparently
into empty air. At sight of that, Bright Robe threw himself flat on the
sodden snow, his great body shook and dwindled,--and behold, a slim,
white hare darted from the empty clearing into the forest.

An hour passed. The old woman crawled to her wigwam and squatted in the
doorway. Several times she heard a strange noise in the air, as of a
swift small wind. But the tree-tops were not stirred by it. The flames
of the little fire behind her sank and the coals faded to black and
gray. The sun stood midway in the southern sky, and cast a straight
shaft of light through the smoke-hole in the roof of the lodge. But
Whispering Grass gave no heed to either the fire or the sun, but gazed
out, eager yet fearful, for more wonders to be enacted in the quiet
clearing.

The sun slid a hands-breadth to the westward and the shaft of light
ran crooked in the dusk of the lodge. A tumult of crashing branches
arose on the upper slopes of the hill and descended toward the
clearing. Out of the shelter broke Bright Robe, now in his human form,
but many times increased in stature, struggling with and clinging to
some unseen body in his arms. His club was gone and blood ran down his
great breast from a gash in the shoulder. He put his gigantic muscles
to every trick of wrestling, showing no fatigue, and yet he was forced
backward and downward, and sometimes swung almost clear of the ground.
Sweat streamed from his great face, and stood like dew on his body,
from which his shirt of dressed leather had been torn.

The desperate battle wrenched and twisted half-way down the clearing.
There, for a dozen seconds, it paused, as if the strength of the
invisible one had slackened. Then, with redoubled violence, Bright
Robe was forced backward again, flung from side to side, battered,
staggered, and overborne. Now his face, for the first time, shone with
the pitiful, inner illumination of fear. He screamed in his anguish
of spirit and bent all his strength to clear himself from the grasp
of the invisible enemy. He hurled his gigantic body this way and
that, dragging backwards and sideways. Half-grown trees were snapped
off by the straining feet of the wrestlers. Blood dyed the trampled
snow,--more blood than that which ran from Bright Robes wound. At
last, beyond the fringe of trees at the lower edge of the clearing,
the evil magician fell, crashing, to the ground. A scream of fear and
baffled passion clanged across the wilderness, ringing from wood to
wood and waking terrific echoes against every hillside. For a little
while there continued a sound of gigantic struggling.

Whispering Grass was still squatting on the threshold of her lodge,
when a young man issued from the woods where the fight had so lately
ended, and limped toward her. His clothing of fine white leather, set
out with bright stones, was torn and blood-stained. Blood streamed
down across his face and breast from a gash on his forehead. Even the
moccasins on his feet were torn and dyed with blood. The sight of his
pitiful condition drove the numbness of fear from the old woman and she
hobbled forward and helped him into the lodge and onto her own couch of
spruce-branches and furs.

I am in sore need of your healing, Whispering Grass, said the youth,
faintly.

Lie quiet, she replied. In a few days you will be able to tell me
how you came by these grievous hurts.

But her curiosity pricked her shrewdly to know if this young man had
been mixed in the terrific battle, part of which she had so lately
witnessed. And did he know anything of the Unseen One who had
vanquished Bright Robe? She washed the wounds on the strangers head
and breast, and bound them with dried leaves of medicinal virtue. She
gave him a draught that was both vivifying and soothing. He was already
nodding when she removed the torn coverings from his feet, to attend to
the cuts and bruises thereon that puzzled her even more than the hurts
on his body. His eyes flashed open.

Give me the moccasins, he cried, eagerly, extending a hand.

I will make you a new pair, she said. These are past mending.

Not so, he replied. Give them to me, I pray you. Place them under my
head.

She humoured him, smiling the while at his foolishness. Within a
minute, his eyes were closed in slumber.




CHAPTER VIII

THE YOUTH RECOVERS HIS STRENGTH AND VISITS RUN-ALL-DAY


When the young man awoke after a sleep of sixteen hours duration, he
begged for food. Whispering Grass held a small vessel of broth to his
lips. He drained it at a gulp, and demanded meat and fish.

I am hungry, he said, for I have spilled blood and the strength of
an hundred men. Do you expect me to recover my lost energy by means of
a mouthful of hot water?

Much against her convictions as a physician, the old woman cut a meagre
slice of dried caribou meat, broiled it and gave it to the invalid. He
devoured it ravenously, making no more than two mouthfuls of it.

You will heat your blood. You will have a fever, she exclaimed.

My friend, he replied, this is no time for half-measures. Even my
good hunger-belt would be useless now. Though you behold but a small
man lying here, sorely cut and bruised, yet the strength of a giant
must be recuperated.

Of a giant? she queried, wondering if the fever had already found him.

He nodded. Of the giant who mastered Bright Robe, he said.

Of the great, invisible one? she asked, in an awe-stricken whisper.

Even so. Was it not a great battle?

And you--? Why must you eat, young man, to feed his body?

We have but the one mouth, old woman, he replied, smiling gently.

Who are you, chief? she cried.

They call me Wise-as-a-she-wolf, he said.

Whispering Grass was amazed and disconcerted. For a long time she could
do nothing but gaze at the slight, mild-featured youth reclining on her
couch. Could this be the furious, invisible fighter who had hunted the
mighty Bright Robe from one form to another before her eyes; who had
done battle with him, struck fear into his heart, and overthrown him?

At last she found the use of her tongue again. You saved me from his
wrath, chief; but who is to protect me when you go again about your
great affairs? she asked.

The heart of Bright Robe is known over all the world, she continued,
and his black soul is never deaf to the cry of vengeance. When the
winds forget to blow we may expect that terrible one to forget those
who have angered him.

We shall be warmed by five summers before Bright Robe regains his
power to harm, replied the youth. For five summers and five aching
winters, he must make his home in the trees, in the shape of a little
brown owl.

Why did you not kill him, chief? asked Whispering Grass. He is your
enemy, and the enemy of the whole world.

I did what was in my power, replied Wise-as-a-she-wolf. Only the
gods can take his life. He and I have drunk of the same river, that
flows around and around at the very top of the world. But I took his
magic robe from him, and broke his giants body, and spilled his magic
for five winters. He could have done no more to me had he defeated me
in the battle.

And when the five winters are sped? queried the old woman.

I shall be waiting for him, replied the youth.

The wounds of the good magician healed with a wonderful rapidity, that
was not entirely due to the skill of Whispering Grass. And his appetite
for food, for a few days, was a thing to strike consternation to the
heart of a housekeeper. He ate dried fish and dried meat like a pack
of wolves, for a giant as tall as a pine and as broad as a hill lurked
within his slender frame. He promised that he would refill the larder
as soon as he was on his feet.

On the third day after the battle, he was able to sit up and repair
his moccasins, which had been torn on rocks and timber in the heroic
combat. They had not been made for such rough usage, for they were
the moccasins of the wind. While he worked, patching and stitching
with skill and patience, Whispering Grass told him of the visit of
the chief who had come for medicine for his child, and of how Bright
Robe had seen him flying from the hillside and had mistaken him for
Wise-as-a-she-wolf. She described the chief; and the magician knew that
Run-all-day had made use of the red feathers.

On the morning of the fifth day after the fight with Bright Robe, the
youth arranged his garments of dressed leather, which had been cleaned
and mended, and assured the old woman that his injuries were entirely
cured and that he must go about his business again.

It was a speedy cure, replied Whispering Grass. I can find the wish,
in my selfish old heart, that your magic and my poor washes had not
healed the wounds so quickly, for now I shall spend my lonely days in
fear of that little brown owl.

At that the youth laughed. Only the mice and the sparrows need fear
him, for many moons, said he.

But the heart within his little breast is still the heart of Bright
Robe, argued the old woman, dismally wagging her head.

I tell you that he is harmless, save to the smallest creatures of the
wood, replied the magician, with a note of sternness in his voice. He
stepped to the door of the lodge.

I shall return in a few minutes with meat and fish and pemmican, he
said.

Then, for a second, she heard the swishing rush of his flight. She
hobbled to the doorway and looked out; but the sky was empty. So
she turned back and busied herself with setting the lodge in order,
muttering and shaking her gray head over the wonders that had crowded,
of late, into her secluded life. She was spreading the skins on the
couches when a shadow fell across the floor. Turning, she beheld
Wise-as-a-she-wolf. His smooth face was flushed and he breathed as one
after a sharp run. Your store-house is full, he said. I went to my
own village and got food for you; enough of the best to last you three
moons. And here is a little whistle, made of willow. Blow upon it if
you happen to be in need of my help, and I shall hear, and make speed
to you, no matter in what part of the world I may be. But remember,
should you blow upon this whistle without real need, the note of it
will not reach my ears.

The old woman accepted the gift gratefully and immediately set about
fastening it around her neck by a leathern thong. And when she raised
her eyes from the task the good magician was gone.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf, invisible by the potency of his own magic and with
the silver robe of his rival under his arm, sped eastward in search of
Run-all-days village. The afternoon was well spent before he found it,
for it was a new village.

Alighting nearby, under a clump of crowded pines, he hid the white robe
and walked, in his usual form, through the woods to the clustered
lodges. Half a dozen women, and a few old men, were seated outside the
wigwams, some weaving rough baskets and others laboriously shaping
canoe paddles by means of flint wedges and knives. They looked at
the strange young man with undisguised wonder. He greeted them
good-naturedly and walked straight to the big lodge, feeling sure
that, in so small a village, Run-all-day would be chief. Singing Bird
caught sight of him before he reached the open doorway and whispered to
Red Willow that the young man who had spent a night with them, during
the previous summer, was approaching. Then Red Willow and old Blowing
Fog knew that it was the great magician. Run-all-day and the other
able-bodied men and boys of the village were away, hunting the beaver
and musquash along the breaking streams.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf, great in magic, fearless in battle, peeped into the
lodge. On seeing only women and children there, he stepped shyly to one
side and looked vaguely around, as if uncertain what to do next. The
chatter of women could not be answered by magic and his valour was no
shield against the big eyes of Singing Bird. But before he could plan
a dignified escape Red Willow looked out and invited him to enter. He
stepped cautiously within; whereupon she sent all the children save the
baby to play outside, thus making room for him to sit on one of the
skin-covered couches. He inquired the whereabouts of Run-all-day, and
then asked if the baby was quite recovered from its recent illness.

He is cured, chief, thanks to your gift of red feathers, replied Red
Willow.

The magician expressed his pleasure at this and smiled bashfully at
the baby. Then followed a silence that lasted for several minutes. It
was broken by old Blowing Fog who had been blinking curiously at the
visitor ever since his arrival.

Great magicians were bigger men, in my young days, said she.

Red Willow and Singing Bird were horrified at that remark; but the
young man laughed good-naturedly.

There was Highest Star, who slew the great moose that swam across the
Narrow Sea, continued the old woman, complacently. He killed the
fearful beast with one blow of his closed hand. Many a time did he
visit my fathers lodge. He was ten feet high and broad as a bear is
long.

And where is he now? asked the youth.

Blowing Fog could not tell him, for certain, but she had her
suspicions. One was that the gods had grown jealous of his greatness
and had buried him under a mountain. Another was that he himself had
become a divinity and now sat in some gorgeous lodge beyond the sunset,
superior to the affairs of the island in which he had been born.

Nay, do not mourn him, said the youth, for he still lives on the
earth and is even now in this island.

Then I would I might see him again, cried Blowing Fog, for he was as
beautiful and good as he was big.

Highest Star was one of the names men called me by, said the
magician, modestly.

But he was double the size of you, chief, expostulated Blowing Fog.
With one blow of his hand he killed the great moose that swam across
the Narrow Sea to overthrow our lodges.

She eyed him skeptically.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf nodded his head. Yes, yes, I remember, he said.
The great moose was thrice the size of his kind and his antlers
spread more than the width of this fine lodge. He was king of all
the moose of the western lands. But I was more than ten feet high
when I slew him. Large as I was then, I doubled my stature before I
encountered that gigantic beast. As he drew himself out of the water, I
smote him on the forehead, for the safety of my people.

Then why do you go about in so humble a shape to-day? asked Blowing
Fog, cunningly.

You do not believe me, he said, eyeing her steadily.

The old woman was silent for a moment.

Even Bright Robe stood in fear of Highest Star, she said, but
Wise-as-a-she-wolf went softly about the world, studying magic. He was
not a great warrior.

Highest Star was one of the names men called me by, replied the
youth, quietly. He looked at Red Willow.

Do you doubt what I tell? he asked her.

I do not doubt you, chief, she replied.

At that moment the voice of Run-all-day was heard without, speaking
to Singing Bird. As he entered, the women turned their eyes from the
magician to the door.

Where is the great and good Wise-as-a-she-wolf? asked the hunter,
peering about him. Sure enough, there was not a sign of the young man
in the lodge.

He is here, whispered Red Willow. He was seated there, but a moment
ago.

Blowing Fog gazed wildly around, but said nothing. She trembled
with fear, and wished that she had not voiced her doubts nor spoken
slightingly of the gentle ways of Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

I do not see him, said the hunter. Surely he slipped outside when
you were not watching.

He gazed all around, and up and down. Was he angry? he asked. Was he
displeased with me for having used the red feathers?

You used them in a good cause, my friend, said a gruff but kindly
voice from up near the peak of the high lodge. The three stared upward,
awe-stricken. The old woman clung desperately to Red Willow. At last
Run-all-day found his voice.

Are you displeased with me, chief? he asked.

Nay, friend, replied the voice of the unseen, from the dusky peak of
the lodge, tis Blowing Fog who has displeased me with her talk.

But she is old, chief, said the hunter, apologetically. Her wits are
dull, but her tongue wags. I am sure that, whatever she said, she meant
nothing disrespectful by it.

At that, Blowing Fog loosed her hold of Red Willows hand, and,
forgetting her fear, glared in rage and amazement at her tactless
son-in-law. So she wagged her tongue, did she? And she was old? And
her wits were dull,--the impudent rascal. She drew a deep breath,
preparatory to loosing her wrath upon the hunter, when the voice from
the roof spoke again.

I, too, am old, said the voice. I was old before this woman was
born; and yet I do not doubt a persons word until I have proved him a
liar.

The hunter looked sternly at the old woman. You doubted this great
chiefs word, he cried. And yet you know that it was by his magic
gift that I was able to fly to Whispering Grass, and home again, swift
as a hawk, and so save the life of the little warrior.

Blowing Fog was now too angry and mortified to fear anything.

Silence, blockhead! she cried. What do you know of magic and
magicians? Tis but a little while since you were afraid to touch
the red feathers. And Bright Robe turned your heart to water, with a
glance.

She looked upward. Chief, she said, have you but made yourself
invisible and thrown your voice into the peak of the roof, or do
you really stand with your feet on the ground and your head in the
smoke-hole?

Poor Red Willow was horrified at her mothers temerity and uncalled-for
rudeness. With a sobbing cry, she tried to place her hand over the old
womans mouth. But she did not succeed, and received a shrewd blow on
the cheek for her pains.

Old woman, you shall see, with your own eyes, whether or not
Wise-as-a-she-wolf speaks the truth, cried the angry voice from above.

Forgive her, chief. Do not hurt her, cried Red Willow and the hunter.
Then they fell back, against the bark walls of the lodge, speechless;
for there bulked a great figure, its feet in the middle of the floor,
its knees bent, and its head against the very top of the roof.

These quarters cramp me, said the giant, and he immediately
straightened his knees and his back and expanded his chest. The great
lodge was ripped and torn, and with the top of it on his head, the
incensed magician strode away into the woods.

Then there was panic and tumult in the village. Women screamed and men
shouted and old Blowing Fog fell down in a fit. Red Willow clutched her
littlest baby tightly in her arms and her other children scampered to
her protection and clung to her garments.

Silence! cried Run-all-day to the villagers. I do not blame the
great magician for getting angry and showing his power. And see, he has
hurt no one. Throw some cold water on the old woman. She insulted my
friend and master in my own lodge--and yet we must not let her die in
the grip of fear. He was very angry with his mother-in-law.

Liberal sousings of icy water soon caused the old woman to open her
eyes, spring to her feet and attack the people who had carried the
water and poured it upon her with such gusto. She dealt old Green Bow a
slap on the side of the head that shook the few teeth in his jaws, and
was about to assault another ancient warrior when Wise-as-a-she-wolf,
once more in the shape of a mild young man, again appeared. At sight
of him she slipped quietly behind the fattest person present. The
magician went straight to Red Willow.

I am sorry that I lost my temper, he said, sincerely. I acted like
a braggart; and I have ruined your fine lodge. But I will set to work
immediately to rebuild it.

The poles and bark of which the big wigwam had been constructed were
uninjured. Wise-as-a-she-wolf and Run-all-day set to work like beavers
and their example was soon followed by all the villagers save Green
Bow. He, poor old man, went home and nursed his jaw. By the fall of
dusk the big lodge was as good as new again, and the entire family and
their guest sat comfortably within. Blowing Fog busied herself with
cooking the evening meal, and had not a word to say. But the sight of
Wise-as-a-she-wolfs stature and strength had impressed her tough old
heart more than a dozen less spectacular demonstrations of his magical
powers would have done.

The good magician, his conscience still pricking him for his recent
violence, made himself very agreeable. He cut several of the bright
stones from his shirt of leather and gave one to each of the children,
including the girl, Singing Bird, and the littlest baby. They are
jewels of courage, he said, and impart their virtue to the wearer.
They were dug from great mountains, by a fierce red-skinned people who
live far to the south and west, in a great land beyond the seas.

He told them some of the adventures that had befallen him since their
last meeting. He gave a modest account of his battle with Bright Robe,
near the lodge of Whispering Grass. The heart of Run-all-day was glad
within him when he heard that the cruel magician had been overthrown
and shorn of his powers for five long summers. Even Blowing Fog forgot
her disgrace for a moment and cackled. Ho! ho! Think of that little
brown owl with the heart of that great magician under his ribs. He will
be a mighty slayer of wood mice. Ho! ho!

Everybody laughed at that,--even the little children who did not know
what it meant.

Early next morning the magician drew Run-all-day aside and charged him
to be careful of the red feathers.

Make use of them only in worthy adventures, for the saving of your own
life or the lives of others, he said. And do not let them become a
matter of common report, for even though Bright Robe is harmless for a
long time, there are many others who know their virtue and would risk
much to possess them. Remember that you have them in charge for the
littlest warrior, of whom I expect great things.

Then he went into the woods and took the white robe from its
hiding-place, and flew northward and westward.




CHAPTER IX

THE LITTLE BROWN OWL HUNTS FOR FOOD


Wise-as-a-she-wolf had not been gone from the clearing of Whispering
Grass more than ten minutes before the little brown owl that had once
been Bright Robe made his appearance from the gloom of the woods and
perched on one of the poles at the peak of the lodge. The old woman
looked up and saw the round, yellow eyes staring down at her with such
a hateful glare that she knew them for the orbs of the cruel magician.
Her heart weakened within her. She could not remove her eyes from
the threatening, baleful regard. But as the owl did not come nearer,
courage returned to her by slow degrees. She remembered that, no matter
how murderous the birds designs upon her, he was but a bird after all,
with no power to change his shape until five long summers were passed.
So, suddenly, she turned away, snatched a fagot from the ground and
hurled it upward through the smoke-hole in the peak of the wigwam. But
the owl was already in the air, floating back to the dense shades of
the forest.

The owl did not move again from his retreat in a thicket of pines,
until night. He was hungry; and as soon as darkness fell he ventured
from his perch to look for food. The thought of raw flesh was not
repulsive to him, for he had even eaten it in his human form; but he
had grave misgivings as to his present ability to kill. He knew that he
must fly very quietly, peering about for mice and birds, and, at the
first movement in the moss or foliage, pounce down and strike with his
claws. So shrewdly did hunger gnaw him that he quite forgot, for the
time being, the indignity of his position.

He moved through the forest ways like a drifting shadow, sometimes
close to the ground, sometimes among the pointed tree-tops. For several
hours he hunted high and low, far and wide, without detecting so much
as a sign of life in woodland or barren. At last he lit on the tip of a
little spruce tree and peered sharply about on all sides and listened
intently. He heard a slight rustle at the foot of the tree but could
see nothing. Again the rustling sound came to his alert ears and
he saw something moving on the ground, beyond the lowest branch of
the tree. It must be a mouse he thought, and the idea fairly made his
little beak water with anticipation of the feast.

[Illustration: THE ASTONISHED BUNNY HAD DEALT HIM A SHREWD BLOW WITH
ONE OF HIS BIG HIND LEGS.]

He marked the spot, and pounced. His claws hooked into a hairy mass.
Something snarled and sprang. With a terrified squawk he bounced to one
side, just out of reach of a pair of snapping jaws, and flew swiftly
into the top of a pine. He had mistaken the tail of a fox for a mouse.

The owl learned several more useful lessons that night; but he made no
kill. He was knocked about by a white hare, on which he had pitched
with a magicians scorn of the powers of a hare; but he was only a
very small owl after all, and the astonished bunny had dealt him a
shrewd blow with one of his big hind legs. The only mouse that he had
discovered had escaped him with ease; and, most bitter of all his
experiences, he had been hunted himself by a great white bird whose
wings were as silent as his own. Just before dawn, he returned to the
lodge of Whispering Grass and found a few scraps of frozen fish near
the store-house of bark and logs.

He ate these ravenously, tearing them with beak and claws. When his
hunger was satisfied, he examined the store-house carefully. It was
a very small building, raised on four stumps to a height of several
feet from the ground. The walls were made of logs, fitted tightly and
strongly together, but it seemed to him that the roof was composed of
nothing more substantial than a few sheets of birch bark. He scratched
at the bark with his claws and jabbed at it with his beak. He got quite
beside himself with rage; but his desperate attempts to tear the roof
of the old womans store-house, so that he could carry away her meat
and fish, proved futile.

At last, weary from his exertions, he flew to a near-by tree to think
the matter over. He did not care greatly about the food, for its own
sake, for a very little of it would keep him in plenty; but he wanted
to steal and destroy it so that Whispering Grass would starve. A bright
idea occurred to him. He would go to a lynx, or a bear, and tell him
that much good food lay close at hand, with only a roof of bark to
cover it. And perhaps he could even persuade some big animal to destroy
old Whispering Grass herself. Surely the mention of his true name would
be enough to induce the fiercest beast in the forest to do his bidding.

The little owl lurked in a tree-top all day, planning his revenge on
the old woman. As soon as dusk fell, he flew to the clearing and beheld
Whispering Grass squatted in the doorway of her lodge, eating her
evening meal. A dish of meat lay on the ground beside her and the smell
of it awoke a mans appetite in the stomach of the fluffy little bird.
He perched on the top of the lodge and stared down at his enemy and her
repast. He made no sound, and she did not look up. Suddenly he dropped
upon the dish, sank his claws into the largest slice of meat, flew
swiftly back to his tree and swallowed it to the last tough shred.

The old woman knew, in a moment, that the thief was Bright Robe, for
no other owl would have sufficient courage to take food from so near a
human being.

He might even attack me, she mumbled, and claw my eyes out.

So she carried her supper into the lodge, fastened the flap across the
doorway and put more wood on the fire. Terror of the evil magician was
like a cold wind upon her back.

After finishing his meal, the owl set out in search of a lynx or a
bear. The little victory over Whispering Grass made him feel quite
like his old self; but he did not forget the lessons that he had
learned the night before. He flew cautiously, avoiding the open spaces
for fear of the big white bird. He investigated every thicket, entering
from above as a matter of discretion. Though he was looking for a lynx,
he did not want to find one unexpectedly, and he suspected the lower
branches of every tree of sheltering a crouching fox.

After several hours of searching, the little brown owl happened upon
an old she bear. She was hunting mice and seemed to be in a cranky
humour; and when the owl accosted her politely, in the language of the
woods-people with which he had become familiar during his long life as
a magician, she did not so much as look up at him. The owl was nettled.

Do you hear me speak? he asked.

The bear grunted and began to amble away.

Hold, hold, cried the owl. If you are hungry, I can tell you where
to get food in plenty.

At that the bear halted and turned.

Hungry, she grumbled. Would I be grabbing at little mice if I were
not hungry, you miserable, fleshless bunch of feathers?

If you talk like that, replied the owl, you may go fill your paunch
with moss and twigs.

The bear grumbled more than ever. She did not like owls, for they had
the reputation of pretending to know a great deal, and, in reality, of
knowing very little. Also, she had once tried to make a meal off one of
these scrawny birds, in a time of famine. On the other hand, she was
far too hungry to turn her back on any chance of obtaining a full meal.

You must excuse my rudeness, she grumbled, but Im really so worried
about the scarcity of fish and soft roots and the activity of the
hares, that I scarcely know what I say. I believe you mentioned food.
What kind of food?

Pemmican and smoked salmon and dried caribou meat, said the owl.

The old bear sat up and pressed her paws to her stomach.

If I could only believe it. But you owls are all liars, she mumbled.

I only appear to be an owl, said the little bird. I am, in reality,
the great magician Bright Robe.

The bear paid no attention to this remark.

Where is the food? she asked.

In the clearing of that old woman called Whispering Grass, the owl
informed her.

In her store-house?

Yes.

And is the old woman dead?

No, replied the owl. She is not dead yet.

Perhaps you mean that you intend to kill her, sneered the bear.

If you carry away her food, then shell die of starvation, said the
wicked little owl.

The bear was quite inarticulate with fury and disgust. She ran to the
tree on which the bird was perched and clawed at and shook it.

You feather-head, she managed to growl, at last, do you want me to
get my hair all eaten off again by that old womans red fire? I know
her store-house, you rascal. It is as strong as a rock. I tried to
break into it once, when I was younger, and she came out with a stick
of fire and hit me a hundred times.

Before the owl could recover himself from the unexpected outburst of
wrath, the old she bear had ambled swiftly into the depths of the
forest.




CHAPTER X

THE LITTLE BROWN OWL HAS MORE TROUBLE


The little brown owl was both astonished and enraged at the bears
behaviour. He wanted to cry threats and derision after her; but he had
already learned that it is not wise for a small owl to make itself too
conspicuous in the wilderness, especially at night. So he contented
himself with planning, for a full half-hour, the fate of that she
bear, should she oblige him by living until the five long summers and
winters of his enchantment were passed. Even in his pitiful bird-shape
he enjoyed nothing so much as the scheming of awful revenges on his
enemies. So for awhile, the matter of the old woman was driven from
his thoughts; but it was recalled to his mind by the sight of a lynx
moving noiselessly past the foot of the tree upon which he was perched.
Without hesitation, he requested the big cat to stop and hear what he
had to say. The lynx obeyed like a flash, leaping into the air and
alighting with his head toward the tree, crouched, his green eyes
sinister and steady.

Who speaks? he snarled.

His round head was close to the ground, much lower than his
hind-quarters, under which his great hind legs were doubled like
springs. He was ready to launch himself upward or forward, as the case
might require. His white teeth gleamed in the starlight.

It is I, Bright Robe, who speaks, replied the owl. The name seemed to
convey no particular meaning to the lynx.

Hah, it is nothing but a little owl, he snarled, and turned about as
if to continue on his interrupted business.

Not so fast, cried the other. I am Bright Robe, the great magician,
the greatest magician in the world.

I have no time to sit and listen to the lies of an owl. I am hungry
and must hunt, replied the big cat.

I tell you, I am Bright Robe, the master of magic, cried the bird.

Then turn yourself into a nice fat hare, and jump down here, and Ill
turn you into a lynx, said the beast, grinning wickedly over his
shoulder. I am something of a magician myself, he added.

Why do you not believe me? asked the owl.

Who ever believed an owl? replied the other, or, for that matter,
who ever believed the word of Bright Robe? So you are a liar, whoever
you are.

The owl changed the subject immediately.

If you are looking for food, he said, I know where there is plenty
of it.

What kind of food? inquired the lynx.

Pemmican, and smoked fish, and dried meat, replied the bird, in his
most seductive voice.

Nothing fresh? asked the other.

Well, not fresh, exactly, but all sweet and in prime condition.

Where is it?

In the store-house of old Whispering Grass.

Miserable bird, cried the lynx, why have you wasted my time with
this idle tale? That old womans store-house is as strong as a
pine-tree.

The walls may be strong, replied the owl, but the roof is of bark.
One stroke of your great claws would tear it to strips.

It was of poles, laid snug together, when I last clawed at it, said
the lynx.

I tried it last night, answered the owl, and it was of bark.

The lynx came close to the tree and glared up at the bird. His eyes
were round and green, and made the owl feel quite uncomfortable. He was
glad that Wise-as-a-she-wolf had not let him loose in the wilderness in
the form of a hare.

Why are you so anxious that I should have plenty of food? inquired
the lynx, suspiciously. I did not know that we were such good friends.

To be honest with you, replied the owl, I want you to eat and carry
away the old womans food so that she shall starve. My suggestion is
not prompted by friendship for you so much as by my enmity toward her.

How is that? I never knew the old woman to have an enemy before, said
the lynx.

Then the owl told the story of how the old woman had shot the arrow at
him, when he was in his proper form of Bright Robe.

Why did you not slay her then, oh mighty one? sneered the lynx, who
did not believe a word of the story.

It--it was not convenient for me to do so, just then, answered the
bird.

Then why not do it now? asked the lynx. If you are a great magician
twould be a simple matter for you to turn yourself into a bear and
go tear the old womans store-house to fragments, or even eat the old
woman.

To do so now would disturb my plans, cried the bird, petulantly. I
do not wish the old woman to see my hand in the matter, he added, more
quietly.

The big cat snarled disgustedly.

Why do you tell me such a foolish story? he asked. I have never
heard so many lies in all my life before.

It is the truth, said the bird.

I dont know why a miserable little owl should want an old woman to
starve (which she wouldnt, anyway, because she can catch plenty of
fish in the lake), but Ill just go along and see if what you say about
the roof of the store-house is true or not, said the lynx, turning and
walking away.

The owl flew after him and floated above his head.

I did not think of that, he said. I forgot that she could catch
fish in the lake. You had better go right into her lodge and kill her.

That was too much for the lynx. Without any warning, he sprang into the
air and struck at the bird with unsheathed claws. He missed his mark by
an inch.

The terrified owl flew into the nearest tree and sat there quietly
for half an hour. He was thoroughly disheartened, and could not help
wondering what would have happened to him if the lynx had struck him.
Of course he would have suffered the pangs of a violent death; but
would his spirit--his immortal life--have remained in the body of the
great cat, after it had crunched and swallowed his meagre flesh and
bones, or would he have been fated to wander, formless, until the awful
five summers were passed? The idea was a terrible one, however he
considered it. As a man, even as a magician, he had always feared pain;
and, surely, it was better to be a bird than have no body at all.

At last the little owl roused himself from his unpleasant reflections
and winged silently away in the direction of the lodge of Whispering
Grass. He soon reached the little clearing, and floated across it,
close to the ground. He alit on a small tree in the shadow of the
woods, from which he had a good view of the lodge and the store-house.
He had not been perched there long before he saw the lynx steal into
the starlit clearing from the black edge of the forest. He was not
surprised at the sight.

The lynx advanced cautiously, slowly, often halting and looking
suspiciously about him. He circled the lodge twice, then crept to the
store-house and glided around and around it. He evidently suspected
the owl of trying to tempt him into a trap. At last he stood up on his
hind legs and clawed the walls of the little store-house inquiringly.
He sniffed at the cracks between the poles, at first with distrust but
soon with evident relish. He reached up a paw and felt the roof of
bark. He examined it, in this way, from all sides, and failed to detect
any manner of trap. At last he dropped back, squatted for a moment,
and then sprang lightly to the roof and straightway began ripping the
bark. At first he did it gently, inquiringly, but soon, finding a stout
protection of poles everywhere under the bark, he became violent. The
fragrance of the pemmican and fish and flesh stole up to his hungry
nostrils and he forgot all caution in his mad efforts to tear the
well-pinned roof into fragments.

The owl, watching from his perch, was at first surprised at the others
failure, then amused. The roof was more substantial than he had
thought, after all. Well, it did not matter (except to the lynx), since
the old woman could live by catching fish in the lake.

The great hide which hung in front of the doorway of the lodge was
drawn noiselessly aside; and neither the owl nor the toiling lynx
noticed it. Then, suddenly, there sounded the sharp twang of a released
bow-string, and, with a snarling scream, the lynx sprang from the
roof of the store-house and fled into the woods. Again the bow-string
twanged and a second arrow sped from the black interior of the wigwam.
It struck a glancing blow on the roof where the lynx had so lately
stood, flew upwards and sideways and hit the unsuspecting owl a hard
blow across the breast with its shaft.

The owl found himself on the ground, feeling very sore and ill. He
tried to fly, but could only flutter a foot or two at a time, so
bruised were his muscles. He knew that the ground was not a safe place
for him and immediately began to make violent efforts to get into a
tree. Again and again he hopped and fluttered, only to fall back each
time as if the boughs of the little spruce had pushed him away. It
was not only discouraging, but it hurt; and, worst of all, he still
remained on the ground, at the mercy of prowling animals. He rested for
awhile, and then continued his painful efforts to get into the tree.
Failure followed failure, and he was steadily losing strength. He had
about decided to give up the attempt and look for some sort of hole in
which to hide when he heard a soft foot-fall behind him. In a frenzy of
terror he hopped upward again, flapped his wings desperately, touched
the end of a branch about six feet from the ground and clung with beak
and claws. He felt himself slipping back. He clawed; he threshed the
air and branches with his sore wings; and, at last, he reached a solid
perch. At the same moment a big red fox glided, like a shadow, under
the tree. That was a close shave for the little owl.




CHAPTER XI

THE MAGIC LODGE


Of all the great magicians in the north, Wise-as-a-she-wolf alone
worked solely for the welfare of mankind; and, as his reputation for
virtue grew, so did his enemies multiply. But, with the exception of
Bright Robe, not one of them could compare with him for cleverness, or
courage, or knowledge of the secret arts. Few of them possessed either
brain or determination enough to master more than the simplest lessons
in magic! Having attained so far, they were content to practise their
little arts covertly, to serve their own ambitions. They overthrew
their enemies by provoking stronger people against them, working slyly,
with many false tales and foolish antics. They had been at the bottom
of most of the wars in the big island, and, though they seldom fought
in the front of the battle (not possessing the mastery over death, as
did Bright Robe and Wise-as-a-she-wolf), yet they usually gained power
and wealth at the cost of the warriors lives.

These people hated Wise-as-a-she-wolf, because he had always worked
against them. When he was at home, the island was at peace; but no
sooner was it known that he had gone to some distant land than a dozen
little wars sprang up, every village was turned against its neighbour
and battle and starvation ravaged the country. But, of late years,
the island had been quiet and prosperous. Bright Robe had been so
long in exile that he had become little more than a figure of legend,
and Wise-as-a-she-wolf had spent enough of his time in the island to
keep the designers of evil in constant fear. Then the news of Bright
Robes return, in all his old power and wickedness, reached the
little magicians. They heard that he was intent on the overthrow of
Wise-as-a-she-wolf, and at that their black hearts rejoiced, and they
began to plan murders and battles and thefts on their enemies. A few of
them had even seen Bright Robe and offered him their services; and he
was as great and terrible as their fathers had told them. And then, of
a sudden, he had disappeared and they feared that their wicked master
had deserted them, and had offended the gods afresh.

Now, with Bright Robe again reduced to a term of inactivity, the good
magician had time to devote himself to an important task of a rather
more private nature than that of keeping his countrymen in order; and
this was the building of a stronghold in a forest in the very heart
of the island. This forest was fenced, on the south and west, by a
bend of the Purple Hills. Northward and eastward of it lay trackless
marshes and naked barrens. The forest was of pine-trees for the most
part, standing tall and thick over miles of gently rolling country;
and in the centre of it lay a pond, fed by hidden springs of pure,
ice-cold water. The good magicians lodge stood beside this pond.
He had commenced it when he first began to learn magic, and year by
year he had worked at it; and still it was not entirely finished.
There was ever some new beauty to be added to roof or walls. Only the
Crimson Wigwam, beyond the western edge of the world, and other homes
of the gods beyond the walls of ice, surpassed this magic lodge which
Wise-as-a-she-wolf had built with his own brains and hands. To begin
with, one might stare straight at it for hours, or for a hundred
years, and see nothing but pine-trees. There was not so much as a sign
of a clearing to lead one to think that a great lodge stood there.
And yet, if one were able to reach that particular portion of forest
where the lodge was, and pass the walls, he would find that he could
walk straight through the tree-trunks, as if they were as immaterial
as shafts of sunlight. And so they were. For the sturdy pines that
seemed to crowd so close in the compass of the lodge were but images of
the trees that had stood there before the magician had cut them down,
spellbound there to deceive the common eye. Nothing but the greatest
magic could have accomplished such a miracle. But the builder had
guarded against the chance of any one blundering against the invisible
walls and thereby discovering their magic quality, by encircling the
immediate vicinity with enchantment so potent that it would lead a
traveller ever to one side or the other and yet let him believe that he
was walking straight ahead.

This forest was occasionally visited by wandering hunters, and
more than one party of adventurous braves had camped, for a night
or two, beside the crystal pond; but none had ever suspected that
Wise-as-a-she-wolfs home was so near at hand.

To eyes that could see it, the lodge was a fascinating and beautiful
place. Every stone, and log and sheet of bark that had been used in the
building of it, had been converted, inside or out, into something rare
and wonderful. Bark had been taken from a thousand birch trees and half
as many fir trees to cover the roof, which was higher than the top of
the tallest pine and painted like the roof of the world; painted so
cunningly, with magic pigments, that it changed in colour, hour by hour
through the days and the nights and the seasons, with all the colours
of the sky. It was as beautiful as the sky; and yet neither rain nor
snow could pierce it, and clouds could not hide its charms from the
dweller beneath it. At night it shone with stars, made of rare jewels
which the builder had brought from a distant land. They flashed an
hundred colours in the light which shone from the big lamps in golden
vessels that gave forth no smoke in the burning.

[Illustration: HERE A GOD STOOD HUGE AND BLACK AGAINST A SUNSET SKY,
LOOKING OUT ACROSS A DARKENING WORLD.]

The outer walls (invisible to the eyes of every one but
Wise-as-a-she-wolf) were dull and plain, save for the windows of
crystal as clear as ice. They were built of great fragments of
granite, and pine logs, set skilfully and firmly together. But within,
the rough materials had been smoothed to fine surfaces whereon the
master had painted hunters and beasts, warriors, lovers and battles,
spring and summer and winter, children and gods, in living colours.
Never had there been such a picture before; and never, I fear, will
there be such an one again. He had wrought on it for years. To stand
in the midst of those four walls was to have life, and all the men
and wonders of the world, within the glance of your eye. Here stood
two young lovers in a sunlit glade; and there sat a group of old
story-tellers around a cooking-fire. Here a hunter stooped above a
fallen stag, his red knife in one hand, his slackened bow in the other;
and there a young mother washed her babe in a clear stream. Here a
god stood huge and black against a sunset sky, looking out across
a darkening world of pigmy villages and wide forests; here a naked
child sat in the sunlight and played with toys of carved wood; here
were fields of ice, and a gray sea, and innumerable seals; and there
ran a great wolf with his thin red tongue hanging from his jaws. Here
was a girl weaving a basket of split willows, her face bent demurely
above her work; and you had but to turn your head to behold five-score
warriors in battle, dealing blows and shedding blood.

As these pictures grew under the hand of the good magician, it seemed
to him a pity--great work selfishly done--if no one but himself should
be allowed to enjoy them. So he went out from his magic house, and
travelled among his people with this thought in his mind. And, first of
all, he found a man called Wounded Hawk, who was crippled and sick and
a burden to the village in which he lived. The man was tired of life,
for he had always been active and adventurous, and now his hunting days
were over because of an injury he had received in a fight with a bear.
So the magician took him from his poor wigwam, in the dead of night,
and carried him to his own magic lodge.

For twenty days, Wounded Hawk lived in that house of wonder; and not
once, in that time, did he see his unknown host, though food and drink
were always at his hand. He lived as one in a dream, and was happy from
dawn till dark in the contemplation of the pictures, all valour and
romance and tenderness and adventure and sheer delight; and yet he
knew that they were but drawings of a real world and common things. So
his old zest in life returned to him, and his face grew rosier and his
eyes brighter. Stories of the battles and the huntings and the homelier
incidents, stirred in his brain. On the night of the twentieth day, as
he lay in a sound sleep, Wise-as-a-she-wolf lifted him in his arms and
carried him back to his poor wigwam. When he awoke, he looked about
him at the sloping walls of bark and rubbed his eyes. Then he laughed,
thinking of the wonderful dream he had enjoyed and of the pleasure he
would have in telling it to his friends. Though he was still lame in
one leg, he felt vigorous and happy, and left his lodge and greeted his
friends with a merry face.

Of course they stared at him in amazement. Where have you been? they
cried. You look as if you had found a good hunting-ground.

I have had a good sleep, and a fine dream, replied Wounded Hawk.

Have you been sleeping ever since you went away? they asked. Have
you been dreaming for twenty days?

Twenty days? queried Wounded Hawk, opening his eyes wide.

Did you think that we would not look inside your wigwam, when we
missed you? asked the chief of the village. Come, now, tell us what
mischief you were about?

Wounded Hawk shouted with joy. Then it must be true, he cried, and
not a dream after all.

They continued to question him, and he told them a little part of the
wonder of the magic lodge and magic pictures. At first they thought he
was deceiving them; then they crowded about him to hear his stories.
They built him a comfortable lodge and gave him furs and food; and
his fame went abroad as the master of story-tellers, the maddest of
dreamers.

And from then, to the day of his death, life seemed a fine thing to
him and the world a delightful place. The wonders of the pictures
and the magic lodge were always green in his memory and his stories
carried the fame of the Pictures of Life far and wide. Warriors and
children came to his lodge and begged him to talk, and he told them
great stories. He even painted pictures, with coloured earths and dyes,
on bark and dressed hide, making them as much like the pictures in his
mind as he was able. And he was always striving to make them better,
and to tell finer stories. Love and honour were his; and when he died,
people mourned him as the mightiest warrior is not mourned. And his
soul (which was not crippled) went gladly out on an eternal quest of
valorous and beautiful things.

Another had seen the magic lodge. An old woman, whom the good magician
had found in a deserted camp, had ended her days there, thinking
herself beyond the black river of death.




CHAPTER XII

THE ADVENTURE OF JUMPING WOLF


Jumping Wolf was a young man of twenty years of age, who belonged to
a big village in the south. His father had been chief of the village
until an enemy--a coward who knew a little magic--had first worked his
downfall by secret methods, and then killed him with his own hand. Then
Jumping Wolf killed the murderer with a blow of his club, knocked three
of the false villagers senseless, and ran for his life. That happened
in March, when the snow still lay deep, but with a crust over it in
most places.

Twenty men, old and young and of middle-age, gave hot chase to Jumping
Wolf. They filled the woods with their cries of anger; but the fugitive
ran quietly, saving his breath and his strength. He was a good runner,
and had been named for his agility. Within a half-hour of the fight
in the village, five of the oldest men gave up the pursuit and leaned
heavily against the trunks of trees, gasping for breath. They felt so
many pains in their insides from the unwonted exertions, that they were
sorry they had left the village. It was not long before more of the
pursuers stopped running; and they were so spent that they simply fell
flat on the snow, in agonies of exhaustion. They were very fat, and
wondered why they had been such fools as to join the chase.

Within an hour of the commencement of the flight, only four men
continued to run on the trail of Jumping Wolf. These were strong men,
tireless and courageous. Two of them were seasoned warriors and two
were youths of the fugitives age. At last the chase led to an open
barren which, after a mile of level, sloped up to a bleak hill. Here
and there on the barren were ponds and great boulders, and clumps of
spruce-tuck.

Jumping Wolf headed straight across the barren, running evenly and
steadily; and, as he ran, he slipped his bow from his shoulder and
pulled an arrow from the quiver at his belt. He had done nothing but
slay the murderer of his good father, and there was neither relenting
nor fear in his heart. His had been the hand of justice; and if he
must die for it he would die fighting. Death was nothing for a man to
fear--but, life?--ah, it was surely a pleasant state. So he fitted the
notch of an arrow on the string of his bow, and ran on until he reached
a little clump of spruce-tuck. Here he turned, breathing deep. One of
his pursuers was already half-way across the intervening open and the
other three were clear of the woods.

Go back, shouted Jumping Wolf.

But the warrior who led the chase paid no heed to the warning. Then
Jumping Wolf raised his bow, pulled the notch of the arrow back to
his ear and let the shaft fly. It struck at the feet of the leading
pursuer, piercing the crust and bringing the warrior to a standstill.

Go back, shouted Jumping Wolf, again. This time the enemy obeyed.
Turning quickly, he ran back and joined his companions.

At that they all halted and looked uncertainly toward their quarry,
across the white expanse of snow. One of them carried a spear and the
others clubs or knives; but none of them had bows or arrows. They did
not know what to do next, and stood there, panting and staring. They
had not counted on finding the young man so formidably armed, for his
club had been knocked from his hand during the fight in the village
and they had not seen, during the long run through the woods, the bow
on his back.

Jumping Wolf stepped forward six paces.

There is no mercy in my heart, he cried, and again raised his bow,
with an arrow fitted to the string. You have hunted me like a lone
wolf, now feel how long and sharp are the fangs of Jumping Wolf, he
shouted, and loosed the shaft. They dodged this way and that; but one
of them stumbled, leaped up again and scooted into the forest with a
flake of sharpened flint sunk in the muscles of his shoulder. Next
moment, another felt the pang of a wound in the flesh of his leg; and
the young man laughed fiercely to see the barren so suddenly cleared of
his enemies.

As only four arrows remained in his quiver, he retraced his steps
to where the first arrow stood upright in the crust and returned it
among its fellows. Then, after a keen scrutiny of the forest woods
into which his enemies had retired, he turned again and continued his
journey across the barren and up the side of the bleak hill. He looked
back, from the ridge of the hill, but could detect no sign of his late
pursuers. Before him lay more barren ground, and beyond that the black
forests stretching on every side. He looked up at the sun, a silver
ball in a sky of March blue.

I shall go east and south, he said, and went forward bravely. He
felt no ill effect from the desperate run he had been forced to make.
But grief and anger, and hate for the village that had been his home,
glowed in his heart.

So he travelled for days; and, for a time, he spent his nights without
the cheerful company of fire, not sure that his enemies had left his
trail. He killed enough small game to supply himself with food, and
suffered from nothing except loneliness, and sorrow for his fathers
death. He had known no other care save a fathers since his earliest
years. On the tenth day after his escape from the village, he wounded a
young stag with his arrows and then ran it down in the melting snow. So
he built a small shelter where the stag was killed, and paused in his
journey to make a pair of snow-shoes, and smoke some of the meat.

In this manner he spent more than a week very comfortably. When the
snow-shoes were made, and the best parts of the meat were cured, and a
dozen blunt-headed arrows shaped, for the killing of partridges and
hares, he set out again on his journey.

[Illustration: HE SPRANG ASIDE INTO THE SHELTER OF A TREE TRUNK, AND
PEERED BACK ALONG THE WAY HE HAD COME.]

By this time, the soft voices of spring were awake in the
wilderness,--the murmur of streams gnawing at rotten ice, the dull
creakings of subsiding snows, the swish of thawing winds across the
miles of forest. The snow was wet and heavy, where it still lay deep in
drifted places, and Jumping Wolf was glad that he had halted to make
the snow-shoes, rough as they were.

The spring advanced swiftly. Soon the streams were roaring free and
the great rivers were swinging the pans of broken ice in mid-current;
boiling over them, and driving them together, mass upon mass, in
tumbled barriers of white and gray. The lakes and ponds moved in their
depths at the sure call, split the roofs of their prisons, and sent the
sullen fragments adrift.

The shades of night were gathering through the forest, and Jumping Wolf
was beginning to look about him for a suitable place to camp when an
arrow whistled past him, close to his head. He sprang aside, into the
shelter of a tree trunk, and peered back along the way he had come. His
keen sight detected a movement, as of a shadow, slipping among shadows.
He unslung his bow from his shoulder, and in so doing was reminded of
the fact that his snow-shoes, crude, heavy affairs, still hung over his
back, where he had been carrying them since the previous day. He was
about to free himself from their weight, the better to flee or fight,
as the case might be, but he stayed his hand. He might need them.
Anyway, he was pressed for time, now.

He still possessed five barbed arrows. He drew one of these, placed the
notch on the string, and slipped the blunted arrows on the ground. Then
he stood motionless, watching and listening. A small stream, swollen
with snow-water, ran somewhere near at hand, and he could hear no sound
save its gurgling and booming. After a long suspense he saw, by the
faint light, the figure of a man stealing toward him. He waited, alert
and breathless, until it came so near that he knew it for the warrior
at whose feet he had shot the arrow into the crust, on the first day of
his flight. Then, without a word of warning, with the rage of a hunted
beast in his heart, he drew the bow and loosed the shaft. The warrior
uttered a piercing scream, sprang forward and fell on his face.

Jumping Wolf ran, keeping straight to his course through the twilight
forest. He had heard cries of rage in answer to the scream of the
wounded pursuer, and another arrow had passed near him; but now, save
for an occasional swish of underbrush on his track, the hunters made no
sound. He ran steadily, but with care, for the ground was treacherous.
Beyond the bow and four remaining arrows, he was unarmed. He had not
even the flint blade with which he was in the habit of preparing his
meat for cooking. The knife had dropped from his belt, unnoticed, early
in the day. He had not so much as a well-balanced stick, with which to
fight at close quarters.

Presently the ground began to slant before him. He slackened his pace
a little and ran more cautiously; and the pursuit drew nearer. Now the
slope became very marked, and twice, in the thickening darkness, he
stumbled heavily. But friendly underbrush saved him from falling. His
face and body were switched painfully by branches and he bruised his
feet on roots and rocks.

Suddenly, through the dark wood in front, he saw a glimmer of open
spaces, a gray glimmer dotted with lighter spots, and in another second
he stood at the edge of a great lake whose farther shores were hidden
in the night. Pans of ice dotted the grim water for as far as he could
see, and one, of good proportions, swung within sixteen feet of the
shore.

He had been well named when the chief, his father, had called him
Jumping Wolf. Without a moments hesitation he retreated a few paces,
then ran forward to the lip of the cold tide and leaped into the air.
And even as he alighted on the raft of ice, on feet and hands, with
bent knees under him, he felt something strike and glance from the
snow-shoes on his back. He had been saved from the flinthead of an
arrow.

The shock of contact drove the ice-pan, sullenly rocking, farther away
from shore. Jumping Wolf steadied himself for a second, crouched low.
An arrow struck the ice close to his hand; another zipped into the
water a few feet beyond. He turned, still crouched low, and loosed his
remaining arrows, in quick succession, at the black shadows. A sharp
cry and more arrows answered him. Two of the shafts struck ringing on
the ice, and glanced across into the water. He removed his snow-shoes
from his back, bound them firmly together, face to face, lay flat as
near one edge of the pan as he dared, and used them for a paddle.
The unwieldy craft answered to the strokes, circling and wallowing,
but drawing steadily away from the dangerous shore. He paddled with
all his strength, and once narrowly escaped pulling himself into the
water. Now the arrows flew wider, and he knew that his enemies were
judging his position, and the distance, without the help of their eyes.
He was already congratulating himself on his temporary escape, when a
shock and pang numbed his wrist. With a groan, he lost his hold on the
improvised paddle. One of the chance arrows had found him out.

The jagged flint had torn an ugly wound in his wrist, which bled
freely; and the pain of it, for a time, was bewildering. His belt was
of soft leather, and with this he bound the wound securely, tying the
bandage with a spare bow-string. After a while he began feeling about,
in the darkness, for his snow-shoes. He probed here and there, on
every side, with his bow; but they had either sunk, with the weight of
raw-hide thongs, or drifted out of reach.

It was cold out on the swollen, ice-drifted lake; and it grew colder
and colder as the hours passed. The night was black and clouded,
without so much as the glint of a star in the sky. A chill wind was
afoot, driving the ice-pans down the lake.

Poor Jumping Wolf found himself in a very discouraging situation. His
right arm from finger tips to shoulder throbbed steadily with the pain
of his hurt. Cold bit every bone and hunger gnawed at his stomach;
and the desolation of this strange, black lake, the extent and name
of which were both unknown to him, got into his soul. But he would
not give up the fight, or even so much as contemplate despair. He had
travelled so far, and made three such brave escapes from his enemies,
that he could not believe the end of his career was at hand. So he
kept on his feet, constantly shifting backward and forward a few steps
each way, and waving his uninjured arm about to keep his blood in
circulation. His great hope was that the pan on which he stood would
be driven to the shore by daylight, or that the ice would be massed
sufficiently close to allow him to gain the shore by leaping from cake
to cake. He knew that, in his condition, weakened from cold and loss of
blood, it would be sure death to attempt a swim of any distance in that
icy water.

The night dragged out its black length. The wind fell; and by the time
a lift of gray dawn showed in the east, Jumping Wolf was crouching on
the ice, fighting an awful weariness and craving for sleep that weighed
on brain, eyes, and limbs. But as the light strengthened, he raised
his head and looked about him. He saw, with a dull disgust (for he was
almost past caring) that the shores were far away and the ice-pans
drifting wide apart. He staggered to his feet and gazed around. Was
that a trail of smoke above the dark trees? If so, perhaps it was from
the camp-fire of his enemies. But smoke meant fire, and fire seemed the
very spirit of life to his chilled brain. He should like to see that
fire, to get close to it, even if death were the price. He could not
persuade himself that death was to be escaped, in any case; so he sent
a shrill cry ringing across the water. Next instant he tottered, and
fell within a fingers-breadth of the edge of the pan. Horror of the
icy colourless flood sickened him, and he crawled back to safety and
lay quiet.




CHAPTER XIII

RUN-ALL-DAY AGAIN MAKES USE OF THE RED FEATHERS


The cry from the lake was heard by Run-all-day and other early risers
in the little village. It was also heard by Jumping Wolfs enemies,
who had camped, for the night, on the other side of the lake. But they
could not answer it, for they had no canoes.

Run-all-day looked in the direction of the cry and detected the human
figure on the distant ice-pan. He saw it fall, move slightly, and then
lie quiet. He lifted his great canoe of bark, which, fortunately, he
had repaired with resin the day before, in preparation for the spring
journey, and carried it to the shore. He shouted for his paddle; and,
in a moment, Singing Bird came running from the lodge, with two paddles
on her shoulder. She, too, had seen and heard the sufferer out on the
drifting ice.

Let me go with you, and paddle in the bow, she begged.

As the water was smooth and the ice scattered, the chief nodded his
permission. In another second the great canoe was in the water and the
white paddles were plying and flashing.

At last the canoe slid softly alongside the pan of ice on which the
stranger lay, face-downward.

Come, friend. We will give you a softer bed than that, cried
Run-all-day.

The young man stirred slightly, but did not raise his head. The bow of
the canoe was within a few feet of him; so the girl leaned forward and
prodded him sharply with her paddle.

Harder! Harder! cried the chief. If we do not wake him now, perhaps
he may never wake. Look, there is blood on the ice.

Singing Bird reached out again and jabbed the strangers ribs with
determination but inconsiderable force. At the third jab, he drew
himself up on his knees and looked at them with a wide but dim glance.
He gazed at the chief and then at the girl.

I do not know you, he said, slowly. You are not from my village. Why
did you hunt me so?

We are your friends, lad, and we did not hunt you, replied
Run-all-day. Crawl over here and get into the canoe.

The young man did as he was told, but in a dazed, half-hearted manner.

Steady, cried the chief. Dont step on the gunwale. There now, lie
down.

Then Singing Bird pushed the bow of the canoe away from the flat
ice-pan with its great, red stain of blood. She wondered what the
strangers story would be, and her young heart fluttered at the
adventure; but she paddled none the less diligently for all that.

Silently crouched in the cover of the woods, the men who had so
recently been in murderous pursuit of Jumping Wolf beheld the rescue of
their quarry. They were six in number; for, after Jumping Wolfs first
stand against them on the barren, they had returned to the village for
reinforcements, carrying their wounded. They had taken up the chase
again, with a strong party, urged to the deed by the brother of the
dabbler in magic who had slain the old chief and who had been slain, in
turn, by Jumping Wolf. But this worthy brother had not joined in the
long chase himself. It was wiser and more comfortable to sit at home
and plan new campaigns. Now the pursuers were tired of the hunting.
They had lost their bravest man by Jumping Wolfs arrow, the night
before. Another had been wounded. They were in a strange country and
longed for their own lodges and cooking-fires. So, when they saw the
great canoe put out from the opposite shore, and the rescue of their
intended victim from the ice, they retreated cautiously and then faced
southward and westward for their own country.

Jumping Wolf lay in a raging fever for days. More than once his feet
were at the very edge of the long, dark trail which leads, at last, to
the hunting grounds beyond the setting sun. But he was well nursed, in
a quiet lodge, by old Blowing Fog and Singing Bird. Red Willow brewed
herb-waters for him, when she could spare the time from her babies; and
all the old men and women in the village gave medical advice, which
Blowing Fog told them to keep for their own ailments. The commencement
of the northward journey was delayed for two weeks by the strangers
illness, for Run-all-day would not risk the life he had saved for so
small a matter as an early settlement in their summer lodges. But some
of the cod-fishers grumbled, and even talked of parting from the other
villagers and going about their affairs without the sanction of their
chief.

Go, if you wish, said Run-all-day. But if you do, you need not
return to this snug village when the frost comes. You will have to find
another chief then, and another hunting-ground, and build new lodges.

After all, they reflected, Run-all-day was a mighty warrior, a friend
of magicians. Also, the valley was warm for a winter camp, and the
surrounding forests were rich with game. So they agreed that it was
better to lose a few cod-fish than their membership in the village and
the protection of their big chief.

When the fever had burned itself out of Jumping Wolfs brain and the
awful weights and pains had passed from his chest, he told his story to
his new friends. No one doubted a word of the tale. Run-all-day was so
moved to anger against the distant villagers, that, had his awe of the
red feathers been less, he would have put them within his moccasins and
flown southward, to strike terror into those treacherous hearts. But,
as it was, he vowed that Jumping Wolf had his love and protection for
as long as he wanted them.

Let me be one of your people, chief, said the young man. You waked
me from the awful sleep, gave me care and medicine, and turned my feet
from the long trail. Only my own father and my mother, when I was a
small baby, ever showed me such love as you and your people have shown
me. When I am strong again I will hunt and fight for you and your
house.

So Jumping Wolf, the fugitive from the south, became a warrior of
Run-all-days little clan.

The water was still high in the lakes and rivers, but clear of ice,
when Run-all-day and his people at last set out on the northward
journey. Now the days were warm, and the willows were bursting their
silver buds. The alders were fragrant with yellow blossoms. The snow
had faded away, save from the darkest recesses of the forest, and
many furtive blooms shone from the moss that floored the woodland
valleys. Geese and duck and brant had returned to their northern
breeding-places; plover and snipe piped and flew, and the burnished
kingfisher flashed along the river, from point to point, grinding out
discordant warnings, at the approach of the canoes.

They travelled swiftly, though forced to make many portages by the
strength of the swollen water. It was Run-all-days intention to
go all the way to the great bay of salt water into which the River
of Three Fires runs, making his summer camp there so as to keep his
village intact. He was proud of his chieftainship. A greater and not
less honest ambition than to kill salmon was astir in his manly heart.
He dreamed of a strong clan, mighty in peace and in battle, with
himself as its head and the friendship of Wise-as-a-she-wolf for its
protection. He knew that the future held great adventures; that a day
of reckoning must come between the evil and the honest in every part
of the island. He knew that Wise-as-a-she-wolf was the enemy of every
worker of evil, and he knew that this meant that every other magician
in the land, great or small, was the secret enemy of his friend and
master. Never before had Run-all-day called a man his master, even in
his thoughts; but his brave and steadfast heart had gone out to the
good magician. He would fight his masters battles, when need came, and
he would see that his people did not shirk the fray.

He told his ambition to Red Willow, who was not in the least displeased
with it. She did not think her husband uncommonly clever, but she was
sure that he was wise; and wisdom is a finer thing than nimbleness of
wit.

I shall not be the least of my family, said Run-all-day. The world
shall hear of me as a warrior and chief. I will care for my people as
I care for my family; and there will be talk of my name around the
cooking-fires long after my bones have been covered with the heavy
stones.

You plan too far ahead, chief, cried Red Willow, tenderly. Let us
not contemplate the talk of the villages, an hundred summers hence.

On the third evening the whole party camped about a mile above the
great falls. There would be a long carry, next morning, around that
roaring, smoking tumult of black rocks and white waters. By the clear,
early light they would drop down, keeping close to the shore, to a
point as near the top of the falls as they dared. But now, with the
twilight deepening every moment, it was safer to land well out of reach
of the torn currents. The chiefs canoe had leaked slightly during the
day; so, while the others made camp, he unloaded it and repaired it
with the mixture of melted fat and gum which he had invented for the
purpose.

Very early next morning, before the elders were astir, two of the
chiefs little boys, one of eight years of age and the other of six,
stole from their beds to play. No day was long enough for playtime,
so they must begin at the breaking of dawn. They ran over to their
fathers big canoe. It lay with its bow at the edge of the water,
empty. They played about it for a few minutes, jumping in and out,
and sometimes pretending to paddle, each with a little stick. It was
not long, however, before the elder of the two began shoving at the
stern of the canoe. The six-year-old joined him in the good work. What
was the fun of playing ashore when the river lay so near? Now was the
time to put pretence away and voyage forth like full-fledged warriors.
The canoe touched the water--advanced into the current inch by inch.
Now half its length was afloat and the black water tugging at it. The
children pushed and heaved, strong with the fire of adventure. They
were helped by a current that slanted outward from the shore at this
point, turned toward mid-stream by an eddy just below. At last the
canoe slipped free, and the children scrambled aboard with a shout of
delight; and the slanting current laid hold of the bark and swung it
gaily away.

Old Green Bow, attracted by their shout of glee, was the first to
discover the childrens danger. He saw the great canoe, riding high on
the water, swing in mid-stream and speed down the racing river. He saw
the little heads above the gunwale, and the little arms dipping the
sticks over-side, as if they would hasten the canoe on her course to
the churning falls below. Green Bows wits were hopelessly muddled at
the sight. He stared, open-mouthed and blank with horror. Then he ran
to the edge of the shore and waved his arms frantically and foolishly
after the speeding craft. At last a shrill cry broke from him.

When Run-all-day saw what the matter was, his tanned face went pale as
the bark of the distant canoe. Uttering a low cry, he sprang for one
of the heavy skin-covered boats of his followers, and began unloading
it with desperate energy. Even as he worked, the canoe bearing the
children rounded a wooded bend and flashed from sight. He was about to
hurl the skin-covered craft into the current, still half loaded, when
Red Willow touched his arm.

Quick! Here are the red feathers, she cried.

He slipped them into his moccasins, snatched a paddle from the ground,
and leaped into the air; and the clustered villagers shouted as he
rushed through space and beyond their sight, like a great bird. He did
not follow the river, but slanted upward and passed over the wooded
bluff round which the canoe, with its precious freight, had so lately
disappeared. He marked it again in an instant, in a sweep of his
vision, still unwrecked, but dashing, unsteered, where the water flung
itself into white crests against a thousand scattered boulders. The
roar of the falls was in his ears, and he saw its crown of spray not
half a mile beyond the racing canoe.

He swooped downward and forward, with all the speed of the magic
feathers. It was plain to see that no human skill and strength could
save the good canoe from that mad tumult, so he loosed hold of the
paddle. It fell in the water and swirled away. Next moment he was low
above the canoe. His flying feet touched the trembling structure. Close
ahead spouted a fountain of white water. The children were lying flat
on their faces, sobbing in an agony of fear. He snatched one, then the
other, to his breast and let the doomed canoe go from under his feet.
He rose a little distance, clasping his children firmly, and watched
the canoe fling itself into the white water, emerge bottom-up and
swing on, a battered wreck, toward the hungry falls. He had not been
a second too soon. He uttered a loud cry of thanksgiving, turned, and
set his feet strongly to the currents of the morning air. And when the
villagers saw him top the wooded point, with his double burden, they
shouted again, and danced wildly with up-flung arms.




CHAPTER XIV

THE GOOD MAGICIAN VISITS RUN-ALL-DAYS NEW VILLAGE


The carry around the falls was accomplished by noon. Fifteen miles
farther down stream was another dangerous place, not a fall, but a long
rapid that no canoe could get through at high water. That passed, it
would be quiet voyaging down to the great bay.

Run-all-day did not utter a regret at the loss of his fine, birch-bark
canoe, though it caused quite a disturbance and delay in the
arrangements of the party. Well below the falls, in a grove of pines
that stood close to the river, the men set to work to cut logs for a
raft. They used fire and their axes to fell the trees. It was a slow
job and a hard one. When the trees came down (which they did not seem
in any hurry to do) the branches were hacked off, and then the trunks
were divided into as many logs of the required length and girth as they
contained.

Everybody worked willingly, for even the laziest of the young men
realized that the favour of a great chief like Run-all-day was
well worth sweating for. He was a friend of the good magician; he
possessed the power of flight like a bird; he was able to snatch his
children--then why not his warriors?--from the very jaws of death. So
they hacked and burned with a will.

At last ten logs were ready and rolled down to a quiet eddy against the
shore. Six were floated side by side, close together, and bound firmly
with thongs of hide. The other four, slightly smaller in size, were
bound on top of the six, making a sort of upper deck which stood clear
of the water. But by the time the raft was completed, the sun was so
low in the west that it was hardly worth while to embark again that day.

Next morning the raft was loaded with the provisions and household
goods that had begun the journey in the lost canoe. Some other freight
was added, and Run-all-days family found seats, here and there, in
the other canoes. Then the chief and one of the young men manned the
raft, one standing at each end, and pushed it out of the eddy with long
poles. The raft proved almost as swift, or, rather, not much slower
than the canoes of hide, and it was certainly a great deal steadier and
as easily managed. And so they continued their journey, but little the
worse for the accident.

When the rapid was reached the raft, with its freight securely
fastened, was lowered from eddy to eddy, by means of a tow-line of
twisted hide.

Salt water was reached about mid-afternoon of the next day, and the
cod-fishers led the party straight to the site of their last years
camp. Temporary shelters were pitched before dark. Then Run-all-day
examined the ground on every side, deciding the positions of the lodges
and other weighty matters. So, in a weeks time, Run-all-days summer
village was built; and the cod-fishing prospered amazingly.

Jumping Wolf won back his strength and was soon able to work at the
fishing, to handle the cranky canoes, and to compete with the other men
at all manner of sports. At shooting an arrow far and straight, only
the chief himself was the new clansmans superior. When he was fully
recovered from his illness, he could out-leap them all, jumping either
high or wide. Also, he was the swiftest runner in the village; and even
in the long races of five miles or more, only the chief could pass
him. So Jumping Wolf stood high among the warriors of the little clan.

During the summer, six more families joined Run-all-days band. They
were all of his own people, of the same great tribe into which he had
been born. They had been without a leader for several seasons, moving
as the whim suggested, hunting or fishing when need drove them to
it, and constantly being bullied or robbed by more united families.
So, when they heard of the new chief and the new clan, and distorted
versions of his flights through the air, they came to him, group by
group, and begged to be taken under his protection.

Now Run-all-day, so short a time before content to be only a good
provider for his family, found his hands full of other peoples
duties and his steady head fairly buzzing with affairs. But he worked
cheerfully, turning aside from nothing; but when a matter seemed too
deep for him he sought the counsel of Red Willow, and usually got wise
advice. He fished as diligently as the most energetic of his followers.
He trained them in the uses of all manner of weapons, both for the
chase and war. He made them practise archery, and spear-throwing, and
the art of attack and defence with clubs and knives. He set the old
people to making shields of hide and wood; and on rainy days every
warrior had to make arrows and bows, spears and paddles. And if any man
sulked or idled, the chief took him aside and talked to him, and one
such conversation proved enough, in every case.

One August evening, the good magician, Wise-as-a-she-wolf, stepped into
the village and greeted the people pleasantly. They had neither seen
nor heard of him since early spring. He was in his customary form,
that of a gentle, rather undersized youth. The chief welcomed him with
respectful warmth and led him straightway to the evening meal. When all
had eaten, a great fire was built at the seaward edge of the village,
and around this gathered the warriors and old men. The magician and
Run-all-day sat side by side, on a bear-skin, separated a little on
either hand from the others.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf spoke first. He had read the story of the chiefs
ambition at a glance, and praised the village, the clean lodges, and
the store of fish. He warned the company against greed, false pride,
and deceit, and told them that their hope for future happiness and
ever-increasing strength lay in their loyalty to their leader.

I have seen many a clan torn and scattered from within, he said.
Harbour no traitors or cowards among you, and give ear to no talk that
you would not repeat openly to your chief and the whole village.

Then Run-all-day told him, quietly, of how he had used the red feathers
again, to save the lives of two of his children from the fierce hunger
of the river.

You did well, friend, replied the youth. By every noble and merciful
deed in which they are employed their virtue is increased.

He bent close to the chief. They would scarce lift me above the
ground, when I last took them from Bright Robe, he whispered.

The story of Jumping Wolfs flight from the south was told by
Run-all-day. The magician listened intently, and then questioned the
young warrior closely.

I know those people, he said. They listen to evil counsellors, to
weaklings and cowards who play with magic and work it to their evil
desires.

There is one such coward the less, now, said Jumping Wolf.

Do not boast of the spilling of blood, replied the magician, gravely.

At that the young warrior hung his head, for the eyes of the great one
were upon him.

But some blood is better on the ground than in the heart, added
Wise-as-a-she-wolf, gently. And of such was the blood of the traitor
who died at your hand.

Then Jumping Wolf lifted his head again and looked fearlessly at his
companions. His heart was warm with courage, though it had quaked but a
moment ago.

As the night advanced, the warriors felt more at their ease. Stories
of the days work were told, and nods and laughter went round the
circle. More wood was heaped on the fire and old Green Bow, warmed to
the marrow, told boastful stories of his deeds in the chase, of what
a mighty fellow he was before the years stiffened his limbs. Other
old men raised their voices, some to cast discredit on Green Bows
tales and some to sing the glories of their own past. There was talk
of battles, and of cod-fishing, and of the killing of seals on the
ice-floes from the north.

The magician listened, smiling often, sometimes laughing outright, like
a boy; and, thus encouraged, the old men spurred their imaginations to
the uttermost.

At last the fire was allowed to subside, the company dispersed, and the
chief led his guest to a wigwam that stood in the centre of the village.

This lodge is yours, said the chief. It has been in readiness for
you since spring. And in our winter village we shall build another for
your use, chief.

You treat me well, friend, said the other, touched by the attention.

Your red feathers have already saved the lives of three of my
children, replied Run-all-day. They brought medicine to the littlest
warrior and snatched two others from the river. Also, you have taught
me that, with but little more work and courage, a man may care for a
whole village as easily as for his own family.

He drew back the flap of caribou skin that covered the doorway of the
lodge, and held a torch high with the other hand, so as to cast the
light within.

Enter with me, brother. I would speak on a private matter, said
Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

Brother! The chiefs heart swelled at the word. The greatest man in
the country, perhaps in the whole, wide world, the good magician,
the master of men and magic, called him brother. Ah, he could scarce
believe that such honour had come to him.

Within the lodge, the visitor laid his hand on the chiefs arm and
smiled kindly with his wonderful eyes.

You have done well, Run-all-day, he said. I would trust you far,
for no foolish pride has come to you with new power, and your honesty
remains undimmed. The same cannot be said of many warriors of this
island, for evil counsellors are ever at work.

The woman, Red Willow, is cleverer than I, and gives me light on many
questions, replied the chief, modestly.

The other smiled and nodded his head. He had suspected as much, knowing
that the woman possessed a keener mind than her husband, and he liked
him the better for telling it. But, in a moment, his face was grave
again.

I have come to you on an important errand, he said. I want you and
Red Willow to promise to give me the littlest warrior.

The chiefs breath caught in his throat and it seemed that his heart
stood still, for he loved each of his children as if it were the
only one. A low cry escaped him, and he stared at the magician with a
flicker of fear in his wide eyes.

Is it too great a sacrifice to make for the good of the world, and for
your friend? asked the other, sadly.

But he is so little, cried Run-all-day. I do not understand. What
have I done to displease you, chief?

You have pleased me in everything, replied the magician. Had you
not pleased me so well, I would not ask you for the child. A time of
warfare and disturbance, open and hidden, is coming. I have read the
future, and I know. True, I could not see clearly, but I saw far. For a
few seasons there shall be quiet, a seeming quiet, then the smouldering
of the evil fires, in a score of places at first, and suddenly in an
hundred places. Then my enemies--our enemies--will gather, and the
flames of hate and lust will burst forth. The powers of the warrior and
the powers of magic will struggle on both sides, many magicians on the
one side and I alone on the other, and many warriors against a few.

And what of the child? asked Run-all-day, presently, in a voice low
with awe.

He is of honest and courageous parents, replied the other. I would
teach him what I know, so that when the struggle is upon us, we shall
be doubly strong. I would take him to my lodge, where he would learn
the great secrets, day by day, growing up with a knowledge of them.

And shall he have no playtime? asked the bewildered father.

His very lessons will be play for him, replied the magician, and he
will be safe and happy.

But would it not be better to wait until he is a few years older?
asked Run-all-day. This is but his second summer. Surely he is too
little to learn the wonders of magic.

It cannot be later, replied the other. I must take him into my care
now, before he has learned to speak a word, or never at all.

He will fret for his mother, said the chief.

Nay, for he will remember nothing, said the magician. He will not
know that he ever lived elsewhere than in my magic house, until he is
grown to boyhood. He will be nourished and protected as if he were my
own son. And you may come to him as often as you desire, and he will
know you for his father; but when you are gone again he will not fret
for you, for there is no such thing as heart-ache in my house. Also,
his mother may visit him, but only twice in a season. When he is large
and wise enough to do the great work for which I would fit him, then
shall he be free as I am, to go and come at his pleasure.

It is wonderful, said Run-all-day. He would be safe and happy, and
great; but what will Red Willow say about it?

We shall take her to the lodge to-night, and show her the littlest
warriors play-room, replied Wise-as-a-she-wolf. And then, when she
is there, I shall tell her; then it will be easy for her to understand.

How will you take her to the magic lodge? asked the chief.

You will carry her, replied Wise-as-a-she-wolf.




CHAPTER XV

THE LITTLEST WARRIORS GREAT PROSPECTS


Red Willow was slim as a girl, and so her weight was but an
inconsiderable matter to the arms of the chief. Also, the red feathers
seemed to increase the strength of his body as well as give him the
power of flight. The magician, with the moccasins of the wind on his
feet, ran ahead along the still tides of the air. The chief followed
close, bearing his sleeping wife in his arms. Far behind the village
lay wrapped in slumber, dreaming of cod-fishing, most likely.

The night was mild, and the flight not far as birds and magicians
fly. They alit in the pine forest; and Wise-as-a-she-wolf immediately
touched the chiefs eyes with his fingers. Then, to the bewildered
vision of Run-all-day, a great mass of builded walls loomed from the
blackness of the forest, and from it flowed a light that was as sunrise
and red evening and moonshine, all in one.

Hold her gently, whispered the magician, and follow me close. We
shall awake her within, where no sudden fear, nor tremor of strangeness
shall touch her.

They walked forward, for a few paces, and a great door swung open in
front of them. The chief stepped across the shining threshold, on the
heels of his master, without a twinge of distrust or fear; and once
inside, he uttered a cry of wonder and delight. At that glad sound, Red
Willow awoke, slipped her feet to the floor and gazed about her with
joy in her face. The Pictures of Life marched and glowed on the walls;
the smokeless lamps burned softly, here and there; and above spread the
mimic sky, with silver stars a-twinkle.

But twas not alone the beauty of the place that gladdened the hearts
of Run-all-day and Red Willow. Joy and peace were in the air, as
well as wonder and delight. Here could be no dread of sickness or
sharp foreboding of death; here no thought of hunger, or weariness,
or heart-ache; here could lurk no anger; here could arise no
unfriendliness or despair.

I could sit before these pictures for an hundred years, said the
chief. Surely, though I behold drawings of men and things that I have
seen, they are more true and wonderful than life. Or are they so bright
and clear that they pierce the dimness of my eyes and spirit? Here
are the warriors fighting; and though I have seen battles, and spears
thrown in anger, never have I seen clearly enough to so behold the good
in one mans face and the evil in anothers. And surely the honest
warriors are about to win a victory. My heart leaps to help them; my
hand is ready for the neck of that great fellow with the evil face.
Oh, chief, you have wrought marvellously! Never before have I seen so
clearly the difference between the good and the wicked among mankind.

True, true, cried Red Willow. And see, here are a pair of lovers,
beside a little river. How beautiful a thing it is--this love--and
how bright it shines in their eyes. And here is an old man mending a
snow-shoe, and even that is beautiful.

The magician smiled. If the old mans face were not a good face, if
his eyes were sly and his expression cruel, there would be no beauty in
the picture. So these pictures are like the life of the world; but in
the battles I have turned most of the evil faces aside. For the picture
is clearer than the real battle, for it is compassed in a glance of
the eye. A fight in an honest cause is a noble and courageous thing;
but to picture it one must pass over much of the lust and pain, or the
sight of it would chill the heart of the bravest warrior.

The good magician gave them food to eat and a bright liquor to drink,
and the tastes of these were pleasant and strange to their tongues.
Then he told Red Willow of what he had dimly seen of the future and of
his wishes concerning her baby, even as he had told these things, a few
hours before, to the chief.

He will be happy, I know, in this beautiful place, she said; but how
can I live without him, great chief?

He talked long with the father and mother, gently and kindly,
explaining the great reward that would be theirs, for giving the infant
into his care for a few seasons. They knew he would be safe and happy;
and that virtue and wisdom would be taught to him, and knowledge of
magic that would make him strong to save his people from destruction.

The three returned to the village before dawn. They carried with them
some of the wonderful liquor from the magic house, that Red Willow
might feed it to the baby, to ascertain whether or no it would agree
with him. Wise-as-a-she-wolf had smiled at this precaution, but kindly;
and he had made no objection. He remained in the village for seven
days, always gentle and helpful and friendly. He worked no deeds of
magic and, in outward seeming, was but a modest young man of small
stature; and yet he won the hearts of the whole village, even of old
Blowing Fog, and the unfaltering trust of Red Willow. And the littlest
warrior thrived on the magic drink.

On the seventh night, when all was quiet in the village and the great
fire was banked deep with its ashes, the three again set out for the
lodge in the pine forest; and this time, Wise-as-a-she-wolf carried the
littlest warrior in his arms. The baby slept soundly in that firm and
gentle embrace, soaring over hill and river and barren, forest and lake
as secure as if he lay on the couch of skins in his fathers lodge.
Again the chief ran hard on the magicians heels, with Red Willow in
his arms. The house of delight was reached without mishap, and again
the wooden door swung open and let them in. The smokeless lamps still
burned; hunters and lovers and warriors still marched and shone on the
walls and in the wide roof the stars continued to glint like splinters
of ice. And again the joy of the place lifted the hearts of the parents
and gave them courage.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf placed the baby in its mothers arms, gazed down on
it with infinite tenderness in his eyes, and softly took it back to his
own embrace.

If I should awake him from his sleep, at this unaccustomed time? he
asked, looking at the mother with a boyish smile.

He would cry lustily, replied Red Willow. Oh, chief, it would take
me many minutes to quiet him.

Nay, of what profit is the wisdom I have learned in all my long life,
if I cannot shield one little baby from the grief of the night-time?
replied the other.

Magic and wisdom! Ah, the littlest warrior has not yet learned their
power, chief, said Run-all-day. He would surely lift his voice in
protest if the very gods awakened him at this hour.

Nay, replied the magician, I think you are wrong. The night-cry of
an infant is a cry of dread for the dark hours and the vague fears of
danger that lurk about the black places of the world. He feels, when
only half-awake, the insecurity of his little life, and cries out for
the protection of his parents. He touched the childs face with his
finger, shook him gently, and at last disturbed the sweet slumber. And
the baby opened its round eyes, stared up at the face above it, and
laughed.

Behold, cried the magician. Am I not a nurse to be trusted?

Still carrying the baby, he led the way to the far end of the lodge.
Here was a small apartment, dimly lit and hung about with curtains of
leather dyed in many soft and beautiful colours. He laid the child
gently in a little bed of soft stuffs that were of neither fur nor
dressed hide. It stood beside a couch on which was spread the white
wolf-skin, that had once belonged to Bright Robe. The three bent above
it, listening to the soft breathing of the littlest warrior.

He sleeps safe, said Wise-as-a-she-wolf. He has no fear of the
night-time, now.




CHAPTER XVI

FURTHER ADVENTURES OF THE LITTLE BROWN OWL


Now what of the little brown owl? We last heard of him, foiled in his
sneaking enterprise against Whispering Grass, escaping from the fox
with the most desperate and painful efforts. For the whole of the
following day he remained hidden among the branches of the little
tree; and by nightfall he was able to fly again, though slowly and not
without pain. He found hunting a difficult matter for days after the
blow from the old womans arrow, so stiff and sore were his muscles;
but a worse matter than this was the enmity of the big lynx, whom
he had enticed to the store-house of the herb-doctor. For the lynx,
having found a roof of strong poles where he had been told to expect
nothing but bark, and having received a painful wound in the side from
a flint-headed arrow, now proclaimed the treachery of the little brown
owl to every bird and beast of that part of the wilderness.

So the owl that had once been Bright Robe, that great and evil
magician, lived in fear of his life, in the very country over which he
had so often cast the shadow of his evil deeds. None feared him now
save the smallest creatures of the wood; and even they found him to be
the least dangerous of all the birds of prey. To hide his identity as
that particular owl so widely condemned by the lynx, he was compelled
to cease his efforts against Whispering Grass and refrain entirely from
telling the story of his great past to the forest creatures. For the
word had gone abroad that the _small, brown owl that says it is a great
magician, and has no modesty of speech, has been proved a traitor by
No-Tail, the lynx, whom it led into a dangerous trap_. _So beware of
the owl that talks overmuch, and lies more than is usual even among
such birds. Kill him, if you can, for the credit of the forest._

With every claw, and tooth, and beak in the country ready to rend
him, tis small wonder that the little owl was utterly discouraged.
It was not safe for him even to exchange a word with another owl, so
bitter against him were the birds of his kind for the discredit he
had brought upon them. Their reputation for wordiness and untruth
was so bad already that they lusted for the blood of the stranger who
had made it worse. But, for several days, he escaped the anger of the
creatures around him by keeping out of their sight. One twilight-time,
however, he was attacked suddenly by an owl of his own size; and, for
all the fierce heart in his body, he was knocked about disgracefully.
He sought safety in flight, at the first opportunity, and travelled
many miles, at his best speed, before his antagonist gave up the chase.
He pitched into the top of a bushy tree, to recover his breath and his
wits. In his cowardly heart he vowed that every bird and beast within
ten miles of that mountain should be slain when he recovered his power.
He continued his flight, heading southward, and at last had out-flown
the lynxs story; and he found a splendid hunting-ground, and fairly
stuffed himself with mice. His evil little brain began to plot and
plan again, now that he had the comfortable sensation of food inside
him. He remembered people who had been his followers, men after his
own heart, scattered about the country. They had often been his tools
in past troubles; why should they not serve him again as instruments
of destruction and revenge? And now the need of them was greater than
ever, for he realized how impotent he was, in his miserable owl-body.

These men whom the enchanted magician remembered, were all small
workers of magic, sly, greedy folk without courage or principles, and
with but sufficient knowledge of the secret science to enable them to
destroy their simpler fellows and pass as great warriors. They could
increase, by a little, the strength and deadliness of weapons; blind a
mans vision, for a short time, by the flashing of bright stones and
mumbling of words, and many such pretty tricks as these. But they were
all evil, in various degrees, and looked upon Bright Robe as their
master.

The strongest of these, the one most advanced in magic, wickedness, and
wealth, was Fang. Fang lived in a big village in the south, and was
second in power to the chief. The chief was an honest man, ignorant
of any hidden arts, but a wise and a mighty warrior. Bright Robe,
the little owl, knew that Fang had been plotting that good chiefs
destruction for many years. Why should he not join in the wickedness?
It would be a beginning, and quite amusing, much more amusing than
being beaten and chased by owls. He would whisper cunning advice into
Fangs ears, and encourage him with his mighty presence, and there
would soon be one honest man the less in the world; and that meant one
enemy the less.

The little brown owl spent several days in finding the village in
which lived his old friend Fang; and when he came to it, at last, and
perched on a near-by tree, he was surprised to find all the inhabitants
clustered together, every man talking at the top of his voice and no
man listening. He saw Red Eye, Fangs brother, in the middle of the
crowd; but Fang and the chief, and the chiefs son were not there. He
listened to the angry voices and soon learned that the people were
trying to divide the chiefs and Fangs properties among them,--the
lodges and furs, the wampum and weapons and stores of food.

Ah, so the chief had already been settled with. And Fang, too, it
would seem. But what of Jumping Wolf, that upright young warrior who
had never shown fear or respect? But the matter in hand drove these
questions out of his mind, for the time. He listened to Red Eye, whose
voice outshrieked all the others.

My brothers goods are now mine, screamed Red Eye, and as the
chiefs goods became Fangs when he struck the blow, so did they pass
to me when he was killed.

The air was filled with shouts of rage and derision. Hands (most of
them containing clubs and knives) were brandished on all sides.

We chased the young man, and were wounded by his arrows, cried a
warrior at the edge of the crowd. Are we to have nothing for our blood
and weariness?

While you sat at home, bawled another.

We feared Fang, for we thought him full of magic power, and yet
Jumping Wolf killed him with one blow, cried a third.

Then they all surged about Red Eye, shouting like mad men.

No one fears you, they roared. The old chief used to treat you like
dirt under his moccasins.

Now the little owl saw that Red Eye was inwardly quaking. All his false
courage was quenched by the angry faces, as a little fire is quenched
by a dash of water.

Share the goods as you will, he cried, for I am weary of such
ingratitude; and with that, he made his way quickly from the crowd
and entered a lodge. Jeering shouts were hurled after him; even the
women were not silent in their scorn, and children capered after him
with impertinent whoops and gestures.

The owl did not like the state of affairs in the village at all. Fang
had been an apt pupil, and a sure man in an evil enterprise. And
behold! he was now less than a shadow among his people. Listen! They
reviled his name even while they fought over the division of his goods.
One warrior, snatching a skin of pemmican from the store-house of the
departed Fang, proclaimed his satisfaction at Jumping Wolfs escape.
The sentiment was favourably received, and repeated on all sides.

Truly, he did us a good turn, cried one, when he broke Fangs skull
with his club; for Fang would have been a cruel master, for all his
fine promises. Now we are free and rich, with two fortunes to share
among us. Ah, I am glad that we did not catch the boy while Fangs evil
spell was on our hearts and brains.

And he did but avenge the old chiefs death, said another.

You are full of fair words now, cried an old hag; but you hunted him
out, with clubs and spears. I know the breed; and I think that cub may
return, to strike another blow at the murderers of the old wolf.

Men and women ceased their wrangling and looked at the old woman who
had spoken, with various emotions depicted on their faces. Some looked
ashamed, some afraid, some angry; but all showed uneasiness.

A young woman with a child in her arms laughed shrilly.

You are for ever trying to frighten us, she cried.

Jumping Wolf is a warrior, said the old woman, gazing fixedly at
one of the men. He and the chief were the only warriors in this
village,--two warriors among a crowd of cowards and traitors.

Her voice became higher and shriller. You listened to Fang, and
thought him a great magician; and you watched him slay your chief with
his hidden knife. But, ah! In a second Fang, too, lay dead. Then you
hunted the lad; and he turned you back. Again your picked men went on
his trail; and again he outwitted you. You saw him taken from the pan
of ice, alive, by a strong man and a young girl, in a canoe that was
not like your canoes. Then sleep light, oh, warriors, for Jumping Wolf
has you in his mind. Sleep light, with your spears and your clubs at
your side, for you may taste the heat of his arrows again.

It was quite evident to the owl that the old womans remarks struck
home. Some men scowled; some shook their fists at her; and one
commanded her to keep silent. She laughed, long and harshly.

You should thank me for the warning, she cried. If you but heed it,
it may save you your lives. I warned Fang, for he was my daughters
child, against the evil temptings of that blustering Bright Robe; but
his heart was wicked and greedy. And now he is dead. So I warn you to
choose an honest chief, though you should have to make a three-days
journey to find one. I warn you to deafen your ears against the wiles
of the treacherous Bright Robe, for he is less dangerous as an enemy
than as a seeming friend. And, again, I warn you against the son of the
chief whom you murdered.

The people were now thoroughly frightened by the womans free and
disrespectful use of the name of Bright Robe. They gazed fearfully
about them, as if expecting that awful magician to leap upon
them from the woods or the sky. He had visited them several times
during the period between his return from exile and his fight with
Wise-as-a-she-wolf, and of that fight, and its result, they knew
nothing. The children gazed around also, but with curiosity rather
than fear, for they did not understand the gravity of the situation.
And in so doing, a small boy with a bow in his hand espied the owl in
the tree. With a cry of delight, he fitted an arrow to the string and
let fly. The shaft rattled among the branches within a few inches of
the birds head; and the villagers, looking in that direction, saw
something like a tiny shadow drift away into the forest.

The owl was furious at what he had heard from the old woman. It seemed
that every old woman was his enemy. If she continued to preach in that
vein, and with Fang dead, the entire village would be lost to him in
but a short time.




CHAPTER XVII

A BRIEF RETURN TO POWER


The little brown owl waited in the woods, near the village, until close
upon midnight. All was quiet when he at last flew to the lodge to which
he had seen Red Eye retire, hours before. He perched on the peak of the
lodge, and, cocking his head, brought one yellow eye to bear on the
dark interior. Pitch black though it was, he could see dimly.

Red Eye, he called, guardedly. The words were man-words, but the
voice was thin and rasping. He heard a sound of stealthy movements
below, within the lodge. Then a voice whispered, Who speaks my name?

It is Bright Robe, replied the owl, still in his owlish voice. But he
could not remedy the tone of his voice, no matter how he tried.

Nay, tis not the voice of Bright Robe, returned the man in the lodge.

I have changed my voice and also my form, said the owl, with
wonderful patience for him. I am sitting here on the peak of your
lodge, waiting to be let in. I am not used to waiting. Listen, and you
will not doubt that I am Bright Robe. And he whispered some facts
concerning the past life of Red Eye and of his dead brother, Fang.

Red Eye immediately untied the opening of his wigwam, and the owl
floated from his perch and drifted inside with a soft murmur of wings.
Red Eye closed and fastened the doorway again and then welcomed his
visitor with much humility and many great names. He could see nothing
but the yellow eyes in the darkness.

I know all that has happened in the village, said the owl, making
good use of his wits and of what he had heard before the boy fired the
arrow at him. I have but just arrived, from the frozen ends of the
world, he lied, and I want food. Give me some raw meat.

Red Eye had the carcass of a hare in the lodge, already skinned, and
this he placed on a dish of bark and held toward the yellow eyes,
muttering apologies all the while for the unfortunate state of his
larder. He explained that his fellow-villagers had threatened him so,
that very day, that he was afraid to leave his lodge.

[Illustration: RED EYE UNTIED THE OPENING OF HIS WIGWAM, AND THE OWL
FLOATED FROM HIS PERCH.]

You need not tell me about it, lied the owl, for I know as much as
you do of the matter, though I was an hundred miles away, at the time.

Then he fell upon the raw carcass, holding it with his claws and
tearing with his beak. Red Eye trembled at the sound of the awful
feeding.

At last, when he had eaten his fill, the owl spoke again. Fang is
dead, he said. He struck too soon. I told him to wait until I came
again.

There was not a grain of truth in this statement; but Red Eye believed
it.

He thought himself strong enough to overthrow the chief, without my
help, continued the owl. And now? Well, you know what came of it. Let
it be a lesson to you, Red Eye.

I hear you, chief, whined the brother of Fang.

The owl snapped his upper and lower bills together, for the flavour of
the meal was still with him. He blinked his yellow eyes and stared at
the man more fiercely and roundly than ever. He could see quite well
now; but the man could see nothing but the yellow eyes.

I have been on a long journey, said the owl, even to the land which
lies beyond the last mountain of ice. I travelled with the moccasins
of the wind on my feet. Wise-as-a-she-wolf had possession of those
wonderful moccasins; but I met that weakling in battle, not long ago,
and took them away from him. Also, I turned him into a mouse.

Was there ever such a teller of false tales as the little brown owl?
And yet Red Eye believed every word he said, for he was stupid as well
as evil. He bowed his head before the yellow eyes and chanted, low in
his throat, a song of praise. The owl listened with pleasure, for it
was a long time since he had heard anything of the kind addressed to
him.

I talked with my friends, the gods, he continued, presently, and
they were glad of my victory over Wise-as-a-she-wolf. They told me to
go about quietly, in the form and manner of an owl, and take note of
such as are my friends and still more particularly of such as are my
enemies. And in three moons times, I openly proclaim myself master of
this whole island, my enemies shall fall, to the last man, and to the
last old woman.

Hah, gasped Red Eye. You mean Hot Tongue, great chief?

Yes, Hot Tongue, among many, replied the owl. He supposed that Hot
Tongue was the old woman whom he had in his mind, at the moment,--the
old woman who had spoken so freely of him, that day,--but, however that
might be, he must appear to be quite certain of everything.

Those who prove themselves my friends shall have villages under them,
and great stores of furs and food and wampum, he said.

By this time Red Eye was prostrate on the floor of the lodge.

I have always been faithful to you, great chief, he cried. The owl
snapped his beak again. He was sure of Red Eyes stupidity, at any rate.

Whatever you have been in the past, he said, I want you to prove
your devotion now. This lodge suits me well. You may move into another.
And in the morning you may bring me food and water, and later, the
warriors of the village. I wish to speak with them.

I fear that no other lodge will receive me, great chief, whined Red
Eye. Should I stir from here to-night, twould be at peril of my life,
for the hearts of the warriors are turned against me without cause.

The owl was angry at the fellows disobedience; but he realized that
it would not be politic for him to show his anger. He was only an owl,
after all, and a very small one at that. Suppose he again ordered Red
Eye from the lodge, and Red Eye, for fear of the villagers, again
refused to obey? He had no power of magic, as he had no power of body,
to enforce the command. He would simply have to flutter, and snap his
beak, and even the dull-witted Red Eye would wonder at that. No, he
must be magnanimous.

Nay, I did not mean to turn you from your lodge to-night, good
friend, said the owl, in a voice that sounded like the utterance of
neither man nor bird in its attempt at soft and gentle tones. Sleep
here, faithful Red Eye, here on your own couch. In the morning, after I
have spoken to these hot-headed warriors, you may take up your abode in
Fangs lodge and I shall inhabit that of the dead chief.

Red Eye grovelled in his gratitude, and stammered many words of thanks
and praise; and at the end of it all he added, artlessly, Never before
did I hear of such a thing, great chief, of such a thing as Bright
Robes mercy.

The owl had to close his eyes, for a few seconds, fearing that the hate
and rage within him might flash visibly in those yellow orbs. Oh,
for but a shade of his old power! Oh, for but the strength of a man,
and the spirit of that blundering, grovelling Red Eye should soon be
footing the dark trail.

Peace, exclaimed the owl, in a voice that trembled. Do not put my
mercy to any further test. Go to your couch, and sleep.

Red Eye awoke at a very early hour in the morning, and began to wonder
what strange dream had possessed him in the night. Fragments of it
shook about in his poor skull.

Something about an owl, he muttered. Something about a miserable
little owl, and I thought it was Bright Robe, the wicked one. Ho, ho,
what a foolish dream. And I fed it with--with-- but his soliloquy
ended in a gasping cry. From the shadows beyond the foot of his couch
glared two yellow eyes, full upon him.

Silence, crack-brain, snapped the owl, and bring me some good fresh
meat. Bring me the best in the village, fellow, or I will turn you into
a mouse and devour you.

I thought it was a dream, great chief. I thought it was only a dream,
oh master of magicians, babbled Red Eye.

The owl ruffled his feathers, fluttered his wings, and snapped his
beak; and Red Eye, taking the hint, tore open the flap that covered the
doorway and fled from the lodge. He was instantly captured by two or
three of his fellow-villagers, and handled none too gently.

No more of your nonsense, Red Eye, cried one. Weve divided the
goods, and set aside a share for you, and if you raise any more
disturbances well break your empty skull.

They shook him violently, and jerked him this way and that between
them, as if he were an article of value which each was eager to
possess, until he bawled for mercy. At that, they redoubled their
efforts.

We heard enough from you, yesterday, they cried; and the louder
he howled against their treatment the more lustily did they knock
him about, informing him all the while that he was no longer of any
importance in their estimation.

My lodge! My lodge! Bright Robe is in my lodge, yelled Red Eye, at
last. The voicing of this information proved a fortunate move for him.

What do you mean, you punk-head? cried the tormentors, pulling and
hauling at him with less vigour.

He is there--the great magician, gasped Red Eye. He came last night
in the form of an owl.

Youve been dreaming, feather-wit, said one of the warriors, shaking
him back and forth as if in hopes of curing his mental infirmities.

Look for yourselves, groaned Red Eye. He wants meat. He wants the
best meat in the village, and raw, at that.

They released him and dashed for the lodge. They crowded and jostled
one another in the entrance, each eager to have first look at whatever
had put that crazy idea in Red Eyes head. Sure enough, there perched
a little brown owl on a heap of Red Eyes spears. They stared,
open-mouthed, at the bird, amazed to find even this much of Red Eyes
story to be true.

When you have done with looking at me, said the owl, in a horrible,
rusty voice, go and get me some fresh meat.

In their efforts to escape from the baleful glare of those yellow eyes,
they trod on each others toes, tripped and sprawled and very nearly
overturned the lodge. But they got away at last and dashed toward Red
Eye, whom they saw approaching with a slice of raw caribou meat and
a vessel of water. Strong Hunter, one of the flying group, knew that
the meat must have been cut from the carcass of an animal which he had
killed on the previous day; but he did not give it a thought. He halted
in front of Red Eye, and the others gathered around. They were joined
by a dozen more of the villagers, old Hot Tongue among them.

What is it? Who is it? gasped Strong Hunter. He spoke to us--he, the
little owl--and his eyes were enough to crack ones bones.

It is as I have already told you, said Red Eye, with an assumption of
dignity. He is Bright Robe. He came to my lodge, last night, of all
the fine lodges in the village. He talked with me of many things. Stand
aside now, I carry food and drink to the great magician.

All except Hot Tongue were deeply impressed. Red Eye strode on, and
just as he was about to enter the lodge the old woman cried after him,
There is a dead beaver, ten days dead, down by the river. Would not
your master like a piece of that; he seems such a dainty feeder?

Red Eye stepped from sight, and the warriors and women and old men
turned upon Hot Tongue and vented their wrath loudly and violently.
They wanted to be heard by the inmate of the lodge, for they knew that
he was a magician of some sort. No true owl ever talked the human
language, or had such terrifying eyes. They shouted at Hot Tongue,
calling her wicked, and rash, and many other things. And Hot Tongues
spirit was shaken, not by the anger of the people (for she knew what
that was worth), but by her own words. She had seen magicians and their
workings, and feared them. Cursing her foolish tongue, she turned and
ran into the forest.

When the little brown owl had eaten the caribou meat, and dipped his
beak into the vessel of water a few times, and cleaned the feathers
of his breast, he told Red Eye to bring three of the chief men of the
village into the lodge. So Red Eye went out and called for the three
chief men to come to the lodge and hear the words of the great Bright
Robe; and the modesty of the warriors and the old men was wonderful to
behold.

Everyone urged his own unimportance. By their own account, there
was not a person of any consequence in the village. Strong Hunter,
who had spent hours the night before in explaining his fitness for
the position of chief, was now entirely of another mind; and Seven
Knives, who had then been loudest of all in denying his argument, now
proclaimed Strong Hunter as the perfection of manhood. Strong Hunter
protested.

I am only a poor hunter, he cried. But you are a man of brains,
Seven Knives, as you told us last night. The great Bright Robe would
find wisdom in your talk.

This is foolishness, said a woman. Your talk is all turned backward
in your mouths, for fear of the owl. Here are two old men, who have
lived long enough to be of great importance, and are too weak to resist
the honour. As for a third,--why, surely Red Eye is one of our chief
men.

The warriors were delighted with the womans wit, and in a moment the
two poor old great-grandfathers, both deaf and more than half blind,
were being pushed gently toward the owls lodge, close on the heels
of Red Eye. Every villager,--man, woman, and child--joined in the
procession; but they moved cautiously, and no voice was raised save
that of one of the old men. He, poor ancient, having heard nothing
of his election to a belated honour, protested shrilly against the
indignity of being hustled through the village.

The crowd halted at a distance of about five paces from the lodge in
which the bird was waiting to hold audience. Red Eye took charge of his
fellow dignitaries, at this point, and dragged them into the lodge in
short order.

What is the meaning of this? cried the owl.

I have done your bidding, Mighty One, stammered Red Eye. Here are
the three chief men of the village, as chosen by all the people but a
minute ago.

And you are one of the leaders of the village? asked the owl.

It is even so, great chief, now that you abide in my poor lodge,
replied Red Eye, who had guessed the reason of his sudden rise in the
estimation of the village, despite his dullness of wit, and yet was too
stupid to keep it to himself.

And why these old cripples? asked the owl.

Because of their exceeding age were they chosen, great chief; for it
was thought that they would be wise enough to understand your wisdom,
having lived so many years, replied Red Eye.

You are too simple, Red Eye, said the owl. Shake your dry brain and
find me another reason.

The warriors are afraid to enter this lodge, cried Red Eye, delighted
at his penetration into the matter. Yes, great chief, they are afraid,
for they know that they deserve no mercy. Only the innocent are without
fear.

You have a wonderful mind. I shall certainly make you chief of this
village, said the owl. Now you may let these old cripples depart, he
added.

Red Eye pushed the old men from the lodge; and off they hobbled,
muttering angrily. They had not seen the owl, because of their
blindness, and they had not heard his voice, because of their deafness;
so they were still at a loss to know what all the trouble was about.

Now tell me the names of some of the most cunning and strong warriors
in this village, said the owl.

Seven Knives is a powerful man, replied Red Eye. And so is Strong
Hunter. Yellow Fox is also loud at the council fire, and Mighty Hand
thinks himself as great as any.

Yes, said the owl. I know them all. I have watched them, even when
they thought me a thousand miles away. They are not as great as
they appear to be; and they will be even of less importance before
many days. But, for a little while, we must let them think they are
deserving of honour, so that we may read every design in their hearts.

Red Eye was deeply impressed.

I am your servant, mighty magician, he replied. I live but to obey
your commands.

Tis well, said the owl. Go cautiously, and repeat nothing of what
I say to you in private concerning the greatness to which I intend to
raise you so soon. Now order Strong Hunter to come to me, alone. I
would read his very soul.

Red Eye backed from the lodge, and found the people clustered outside,
eagerly waiting for him. He approached them, and pointed a finger at
Strong Hunter.

The mighty Bright Robe has sent for you, he said.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE MAKER OF CHIEFS


When Strong Hunter, after a lengthy stay within the lodge, appeared
again among his fellows, he looked both elated and impressed and would
answer none of their questions. But he told them that the little brown
owl was Bright Robe, without a doubt; also, that no chief would be
appointed for the village until the end of two moons time, and that
the magician himself would act as their chief until then. There was
some grumbling at that, among the warriors, but no open objection. The
owl had told Strong Hunter the same story that he had told Red Eye, and
had made him the same promises of reward. Also, he had not forgotten to
charge him to keep those promises secret.

He had made a great deal of fun of poor Red Eye to the hunter. And he
had told him to have a huge fire built that night, and to tell the
villagers the story of his fight with Wise-as-a-she-wolf and of his
victory.

When night fell, a heap of wood as high as a lodge was lit in a
dozen places, and the whole village clustered around it. The men
wore battle-feathers in their hair and carried their spears and
war-clubs, for Strong Hunter had promised them that it was to be a
great occasion. As Strong Hunter began the story of the great battle
between the magicians, the owls version of it, Red Eye took his seat
quietly among the warriors, and looked at the orator with a covert and
supercilious smile. He had but just come from the owls lodge; and the
owl had explained to him, in the most friendly manner, that the seeming
consideration with which he had treated Strong Hunter was but a sly
step toward that warriors undoing. He had looked so wise, and sly, and
friendly, that Red Eye had felt quite satisfied.

We will play with the vain fellows, for the space of two moons, the
owl had concluded.

Strong Hunter stood upright and waved his arms above his head, shaking
a spear in one hand and a club in the other.

This is the story of the battle between two magicians, he cried,
between Bright Robe, the master of magic, and Wise-as-a-she-wolf, the
child of vanity.

He pranced forward a few steps, and back again, and twirled about
on his toes. The black battle-feathers flashed in his long braid
of tow-coloured hair. These islanders were not red men, like the
inhabitants of the great lands to the south and west.

Before Bright Robe could strike a blow, he continued, the other
turned and fled, speeding like a flying brant, for the moccasins of
the wind were on his feet. But Bright Robe sprang after him through
the air, reached him and hurled him to earth. Unable to escape,
Wise-as-a-she-wolf fought with all his strength and cunning; and Bright
Robe returned him two blows for every one received.

Here Strong Hunter swung his club, smiting an imaginary foe, and thrust
with his spear so violently that his audience shrank away from him. He
skipped and pranced, struck desperate attitudes, and shouted like a
madman.

Blood flies, he continued. Trees bend, and crash to the ground. The
hills shake and great rocks roll into the valleys. The strength of
Wise-as-a-she-wolf dwindles and his courage runs out with his blood. He
strikes wide. He strikes feebly. But Bright Robe feels no weariness.
His blows redouble their speed and weight. He beats his enemy to the
ground. He bends, takes the limp body in his hands, and hurls it over
the mountain-top.

Ceasing the narrative suddenly, Strong Hunter once more put his
body and limbs in motion. He staggered, and reeled, in the person
of Wise-as-a-she-wolf. He sprang high in air, and delivered heroic
strokes, in the person of Bright Robe. At last he stooped to the earth,
set his hands on an imaginary body and hurled it far over the heads of
the enraptured villagers. Then, drawing himself to his full height, he
folded his arms on his breast and stood silent and motionless.

The applause was quick and loud. Even Seven Knives and Red Eye joined
in it. Old men, who had long since forgotten their days of prowess,
flung their arms about as if in desperate conflict. Young men sprang
from their seats and danced around the fire, brandishing their weapons.
The graver warriors shouted, and beat their clubs on the ground. All
were affected by the orators efforts as if they had drunk deeply of
the strong wine of crushed and fermented berries.

Elated by his success, Strong Hunter went straight to the owls lodge.
The bird received him with gracious words, for the roars of applause
had reached his ears.

You have done well, he said. I see that you are already powerful
among the people, that my good-will toward you is already giving you
new power. This will be the greatest village in the land, when you are
its chief. Go now, Strong Hunter, and send my servant Red Eye to me.

Strong Hunter bowed, and left the lodge. He found Red Eye still seated
by the fire, smiling a twisted, evil smile. Without ceremony, he
ordered him to go to the magician. Red Eye glanced up at him, with a
glow under his lids.

Go to your master, said Strong Hunter again, and still more roughly.
Red Eye went, without a word; but there was rage in his heart. He
wondered what had passed in the lodge, to so soon change the warriors
manner with him. He vowed that Strong Hunter should be the first to
feel his wrath, when the village was in his power. He felt a dim
distrust of the magician.

The little brown owl read what was in Red Eyes mind.

Strong Hunter is a conceited fellow, he said. His vanity amuses me.

It does not amuse me, great chief, replied Red Eye.

You are of too serious a nature, my friend, said the owl. But I
think the bursting of that rascals vanity will amuse even you.

Oh, mightily, cried the other. I would give ten hides to see him
brought low this very night. I would gladly give a beaver skin for
every cry of pain he would utter if I could but stick my knife into his
big body.

Have patience, said the owl. It is my pleasure to sit inactive for
a little while, and study the natures of these people, their hopes and
vanities and foolish affairs. When I am tired of it, then twill be
time enough for you to break the pride, yea, even the neck, of Strong
Hunter.

Red Eye went away from the lodge and meditated. Though he was a coward,
he had none of that fear which is a foretaste of remorse. Let him but
get an enemy in his power, with no chance to strike back, and he would
show no mercy. Pity was a sensation unknown to him; and if he sometimes
appeared to speak honestly, it was entirely due to his dulness of wit.
Now he retired to an empty lodge and gave his poor mind to this matter
of Strong Hunters arrogance of manner. Why had Strong Hunter been
chosen to tell the story of the battle to the villagers? Why had Strong
Hunter walked so proudly from the owls lodge? He thought and thought
and thought, until his head felt as if it would fly into a dozen
fragments, so great was the effort of concentration. He saw a glimmer
of the truth; but no, all was darkness again.

Sometime during the next day, the owl managed to have a secret talk
with Seven Knives; and to him he told the same tales, and made the same
promises, as to Strong Hunter and Red Eye. Also, he charged him to
secrecy.

Three days passed without incident; but on the morning of the fourth
day Red Eye lay with an ear at the edge of the lodge while Strong
Hunter and the owl talked within. He crawled away, before Strong Hunter
left the lodge. An hour later, he sprang upon the big warrior, from
behind, struck a blow and shouted the treachery of the owl. The blow
glanced from the great muscles of Strong Hunters neck, but sent him
reeling, for all that. Then Red Eye turned to flee, still shouting of
the owls treachery. The wounded man staggered after him and hurled
his stone axe, blindly but with terrific force. It struck Red Eye on
the back of the skull.

In a second, the whole village was in an uproar. Red Eye lay dead on
the ground; but his last words were alive in mens ears. Seven Knives
stood face to face with Strong Hunter and asked if there was truth in
what Red Eye had shouted.

Tis true that the owl has promised that I am to be chief of this
village, replied Strong Hunter.

He promised the same to me, said Seven Knives.

And there is another chief, said Yellow Fox, pointing at the body of
Red Eye.

I think if that little owl were really Bright Robe, he would have
shown himself in his true form before this, said Old Hot Tongue.
Bright Robe would have killed me, for what I said about the beaver
meat, she added.

He is Bright Robe, and none other. He knows things that only Bright
Robe or Wise-as-a-she-wolf could know, said Strong Hunter.

Then why does he sit in the lodge all day, and eat raw flesh? asked
an old man. Bright Robe never lets a day pass without some violence or
theft.

He is Bright Robe, for all that, said Seven Knives. And I think he
is still as wicked as he ever was.

I once beheld the eyes of the devil that lives deep in the salt
water, said Strong Hunter, and though they were green and big, they
were not more wicked than the eyes of that little owl.

I do not fear any bird that flies, said a young man, and before they
could lay hands upon him, he was running swiftly toward the lodge in
which sat the owl.

I have a good bow here, and a sharp arrow, he cried, as he ran.

At that the owl shot from the lodge and flew swiftly away across the
river.

There goes your mighty magician, your maker of chiefs, said the young
man.

The villagers stared in wonder after the departing bird, and continued
to stand and stare long after it had vanished.

A few hours after the owls hurried departure, a party of men who
belonged farther up the river arrived at the village. They were on
their way to the southern coast of the island, to kill the seals that
came down on the ice through the Narrow Sea. When they had heard the
story of the owl, one of them told of how he had been sick early in
the spring, and had gone to the lodge of Old Whispering Grass, the
doctor, far inland near the great lake. And he told them of the fight
between the magicians, as the old woman had told it to him; of Bright
Robes defeat and of the spell upon him which would keep him in the
shape of a little owl until five summers were gone.

The people of the village were amazed and disgusted at the memory of
the fear in which they had stood of the harmless bird. But Bright Robe
never forgets an injury, said one of the old men, and I hope that I
may have died peacefully before those five seasons are passed.




CHAPTER XIX

THE THEFT OF THE RED FEATHERS


All went well with the baby in the good magicians lodge. He remembered
nothing of the world and the people that were without the magic walls;
and yet, when Run-all-day visited him, he knew him and ran to him. His
days were full of quiet play and happy, childish fancies. The wonderful
pictures on the walls were his playmates; and he learned their
meanings, gradually but without effort. He felt no loneliness or fear,
even when Wise-as-a-she-wolf was away from the lodge. But he was seldom
alone, for the magician was so happy in the company of his adopted baby
that he forgot many of his great affairs in the world. He would lie
awake all night, planning games, wonderful, magic games, to play with
the little fellow next day. And he painted some more pictures on the
walls, thus expanding the great lesson-book. He painted the flight of
Jumping Wolf through the wilderness, and the young warriors rescue
from the ice, all in the magic pigments that made them true as real
earth and real water and clear as sunlight. So the baby, toddling from
picture to picture, absorbed knowledge of men and beasts, of battles
and the chase, of gentleness and honesty, and of the ugliness of evil.

In August, a stranger arrived at Run-all-days village and asked to be
allowed to remain and become a member of the new clan. He was of darker
complexion than was usual among the islanders and his hair was black
and straight. He gave his name as Spotted Seal. He said that he had
been born far in the west, close to the shore of the Narrow Sea, and
had been a lonely warrior all his life. Run-all-day did not accept him
at once, but allowed him to fish and hunt with the villagers, so that
he might prove himself a safe and worthy man. Spotted Seal soon won the
respect of the clansmen, in spite of his black, shifting eyes; for he
was a good worker and a strong man with all manner of weapons. He was a
cunning and tireless hunter, and skilled in the management of canoes.

Spotted Seal had not been an inmate of the village many days, when he
heard some gossip of the red feathers, from old Green Bow. He showed
no interest in the subject, indifferently mending a fishing-line while
Green Bow told of the wonderful power of the feathers; of how he had
seen the chief slip them into his moccasins; of how it was rumoured
that Red Willow took care of them and kept them in a leathern bag,
along with other of her precious possessions. Spotted Seal looked
indifferent, all the while the old man talked, but his heart was
thumping madly. He had a slight knowledge of magic, and a great desire
to enlarge that knowledge. He was ambitious of power; and this talk of
the magic feathers, which carried a man through the air like the wings
of a hawk, filled him with a fever of covetousness. But he did not
show his emotions by so much as the flicker of an eyelash; and yet it
was for this very thing that he had come to the village. He had heard
something of Run-all-days power of flight, in a vague, roundabout way,
and so had travelled many days to investigate the secret of the matter.
He had never heard of the chief of the distant village as a magician,
and he could not believe that he was possessed of the famous moccasins
of the wind. Now he was glad to hear that the wonder lay in two small
feathers and not in the chiefs own person, for it would be an easier
matter to steal feathers from a man than wisdom out of his brain.

So Spotted Seal began to spy on the chiefs lodge, creeping and
peering about at all hours of the night. At last he was rewarded
for his exertions by seeing Red Willow take the feathers from the
bag, smooth them tenderly between her fingers, and return them to
their hiding-place. Then he saw her place the bag under the skins on
Run-all-days couch. His eager glance took note of the exact spot
where she hid the bag. It was a small bag, of white leather, decorated
with designs worked in dyed porcupine quills. As the night was still
young, he stole away and joined some other men at the fire, and calmly
listened to their stories and took part in their talk.

In that darkest hour before the first glimmer of dawn, Spotted Seal
crawled to the closed entrance of the chiefs lodge, and lay, for
nearly a minute, with his ear at the bottom of the great flap of hide.
He heard no sound from within, save the gentle and regular breathing of
the sleepers. He raised the flap a little, very cautiously, and thrust
his head under it. Inch by inch, and without the slightest sound, he
wormed himself beneath the edge of the hide and into the lodge. Then
again he lay still for some time, listening, straining his eyes against
the blackness, and drawing his breath guardedly. Again he advanced,
crawling almost flat, with one hand held in front of him so lightly
that, should it touch a sleeper, it would give no shock of contact. At
last he felt that he was beside the couch on which lay the chief. He
could hear that warriors breath, close in his ears, and he trembled.
Now his hand touched the furs, and slipped beneath them and encountered
the precious bag that contained the red feathers. At that, his heart
thumped so heavily that it deafened his ears against the sound of the
chiefs breathing. For what seemed a long time to him, he crouched,
motionless, beside the couch, with one hand on the bag of leather. But
at last he gathered courage to draw it forth. He heard the chief stir
uneasily; then lie quiet again. Some one, evidently a child, whimpered
in its dreams. He turned and crawled back toward the entrance of the
lodge, lifted the flap of hide again and wriggled under it and out to
the wider blackness of the open. After moving away from the lodge
for a short distance, he seated himself on a boulder, opened the bag
and thrust his hand within. He soon discovered the red feathers among
needles of bone, trinkets of shell and jasper, and other such trifles.
He placed one in the sole of each of his moccasins, and tied them
securely to his feet.

Spotted Seal stood up and looked about him. The sky, the forests, and
the earth at his feet, were all massed in a vast blackness. A little
stirring of wind, but newly arisen, moved around him. He shivered,
though the air was mild. Thought of the potent magic against the soles
of his feet, and of the terrific flight which he had the power to take,
up and across the blackness, shook his heart and unstrung his muscles.
For a moment he wished that he had not taken the feathers, and even
thought of returning them to the chiefs lodge. But no, he would not
again face the danger of entering that lodge and crawling about so near
to that strong warrior. And the feathers were a great prize, surely one
of the greatest possessions in the world. And now they were his.

I am a coward, he whispered, huskily. I have run the risk of my life
in stealing the feathers from the chiefs couch, from under his body;
and now I have not the courage to use them. It is so dark; but when
daylight comes I shall fly into the air like a bird.

But he knew that it would not be safe for him to wait, so near the
village, for morning. The chief might awake at any moment and discover
the absence of the precious feathers; and if that should happen--well,
Spotted Seal had been long enough in Run-all-days village to learn to
fear that big warriors displeasure. So he turned his face from the
quiet lodges and set out through the darkness. After having travelled
for more than a mile, he halted suddenly and uttered an exclamation of
disgust. He had come away from the village with no weapons except the
short flint knife in his belt. The great undertaking of stealing the
bag from the chiefs lodge had driven all thought of bow, spear, and
arrows from his mind. The day was breaking now, in a clear, colourless
streak along the east. Would he return to the village, and to his own
lodge, and arm himself? The people would still be asleep, and the magic
feathers were on his feet. Yes, he would go back, for he had left many
trusty weapons in his lodge, and fish-hooks of bone, and some good
fish-lines. Even if a man can fly like a bird, he reflected, still he
must hunt and fish, if he would live.

So Spotted Seal turned back toward the village, from which he had
stolen so fearfully but a little while before. The light of day
increased swiftly, flooding the eastern sky with crimson and bright
gold. Spotted Seal quickened his pace, afraid that the village might
be astir by the time he should reach it. Soon he was able to see
the lodges in front, between the ranks of the forests, the sunlight
gleaming on their peaks. Now he advanced more cautiously, and was about
to issue from the trees when a loud cry caused him to halt and crouch
like a startled animal.

The cry was from the lips of Run-all-day, who had discovered that the
bag in which the magic feathers were kept was gone from beneath the
skins on his couch. Next moment, he ran from his lodge, and shouted for
the men of the village, old and young, to gather in all haste. They
were before him within the minute, wondering but ready. He glanced over
them quickly.

Where is Spotted Seal? he asked. Go to his lodge and find him.

The warriors rushed to the lodge of the stranger, tore it open, and
shouted that it was empty; and at the same moment Spotted Seal turned
from his contemplation of the scene and started to run. But he had
forgotten the feathers in his moccasins. The first stride lifted him
from the ground and dashed him among the tree-tops. He uttered a
loud scream of amazement and fear, which was answered angrily from
the village. The voices of the warriors, lifted in fierce and eager
hunting-cries, steadied his wits. He sprang clear of the trees and
soared away to the southward. The people of Run-all-days village
beheld him thus mount into their view and then fly swiftly beyond it;
and they sent a howl of rage and a few harmless arrows after him.

Spotted Seal felt like a man in the clutches of an awful dream, during
the first few minutes of his flight. The world--river, forest, and
hill--sped backward beneath him with sickening velocity. The air
sang in his ears, and his breath seemed beaten back against mouth
and nostrils. The glory of the morning and the rushing air upon his
eyeballs, almost blinded him, and the fear of falling to earth was so
strong in him that he continued, for some time, to exert every muscle,
like a runner in a race.

But, in time, he slackened his pace, for very weariness, and then he
found that he could continue in the air with but little effort and no
discomfort. He scarcely moved his feet, and yet sailed pleasantly and
safely above the forests. His eyes cleared and his breath came back to
him. He swooped gently toward the earth and swerved easily up again,
finding this manner of flight to be as pleasant as it was amazing. He
circled high; he flew this way and that; he ran across the tops of the
forest trees, just touching them with his feet. But he continued to
increase the distance between himself and the village.

It was not until noon that Spotted Seal felt the gnawings of hunger,
and realized that the knife in his belt was the only weapon in his
possession. But now he felt no fear of starving, and cared no more for
the loss of his bow and arrow than if meat was to be picked from the
ground, like berries. He would hunt as hawks hunt, with the advantage
that no cover of brush or branches could cheat him of his quarry. So
he flew low, and kept a sharp watch. A covey of grouse flew up from a
barren and lit in a thicket of small spruces. He swooped down and beat
the tops of the trees with a short stick, hovering above them all the
while. Out flew the grouse, in all directions; and in a moment one
had received a sharp blow from the stick and lay dead on the ground.
Another was soon killed by the same means. Then Spotted Seal chose a
nook that suited him, lit a fire, and set to work to cook his belated
breakfast.




CHAPTER XX

A JOURNEY TO THE MAGIC FOREST


Run-all-day was very much ashamed, and very angry, at the loss of the
magic feathers which the good Wise-as-a-she-wolf had trusted to his
care. So hot was his anger at first, that it clouded his wits, and he
set out in pursuit of the thief and ran for fully six miles before he
realized that he might just as well chase a hawk as Spotted Seal. When
that thought came to him, he immediately leaned against a tree, to
recover his breath and plan some other means of regaining possession of
the red feathers. He had not filled his lungs more than a dozen times
before Jumping Wolf, who had followed close on his heels, halted before
him. The chief eyed the youth mournfully.

We are mighty runners, lad, he said, but only the moccasins of the
wind can overtake the feet that are shod with the red feathers.

He flew southward, replied Jumping Wolf, and if I follow, day and
night, I may come upon him while he sleeps, or see him in the air and
bring him down with an arrow. All I need is a wallet of pemmican and a
quiver of arrows, and then I am ready for the journey. I have hit hawks
and eagles while they flew above the tree-tops, so surely I can put an
arrow into Spotted Seal.

The chief shook his head dejectedly.

Let us go home. I must ask Red Willow what is to be done, he said.

So the two swift runners returned to the village, meeting the other
warriors breathless and still staggering forward, scattered along the
way. So they returned to the lodge, together, all depressed by the
loss of the feathers and ill tempered from having run so far on empty
stomachs.

The chief went straight to Red Willow, and confessed to her that he
could think of no way of recovering the precious feathers.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf must be told about it, said she, after a moments
reflection. He will be able to get them back again; and I do not think
he will be angry with us when he knows how Spotted Seal crept into our
lodge, in the night-time, and stole them.

But even if he is not angry, he will not trust me with the feathers
again, said the chief.

Twill be better so, I believe, replied the woman, for now that
people know about them, and of the great virtue they possess, they will
be a dangerous possession for any man save a magician.

But how am I to tell him about it? asked Run-all-day. Tis a long
journey to his lodge, and even when the journey is made a man cannot
see the lodge until the master charms his eyes. This is the truth, for
he told us so. And I cannot leave the village, for the warriors would
soon begin to argue about this and that, and all my good work would be
blown away as the ashes of a dead fire are scattered by the wind.

And still must the good magician be told the whole story, or his
enemies may use the feathers against him while he thinks them safe in
your keeping, said Red Willow.

At that moment Jumping Wolf looked in at the door of the lodge.

Here is a messenger for you to send, said Red Willow. He is swift
and strong, and worthy of trust. Come in, she added, to the young
man, and hear what the chief has to ask you.

Jumping Wolf entered immediately and looked at Run-all-day with eager
inquiry in his glance.

Will you go a long journey for me? asked the chief. I think it is
a three-days journey, for one who walks, from here to the lodge of
Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

Tell me the road and I will go, replied the young man.

So the chief told him the way, as well as he could from the memory
of what he had seen in his flights. He told him that the magicians
lodge lay to the westward, beyond two large rivers and many streams, a
great barren and many wooded hills. He told him of the pine wood and
the high mountains, and how he must search the pine wood for a little
pond and then shout that he had a message for Wise-as-a-she-wolf from
Run-all-day.

And the message? asked Jumping Wolf.

Tell him that the red feathers have been stolen from my lodge, and
describe to him the face and figure of the thief, replied Run-all-day.

And beg him to tell you of my baby. Even ask him to let you see him,
said the woman.

After supplying himself with a small bag of food, and arming himself
with a knife, a bow and a dozen of his best arrows, Jumping Wolf set
out on his long journey. He was proud that he, a man from the south,
had been chosen, from all the warriors of the village, for the task of
finding the magic lodge and giving the chiefs message. He had no fear
of the hardships of the journey, for he loved adventure as duller men
love soft couches and the warmth of the cooking-fire. So swiftly did he
travel that he came to the shore of the first of the big rivers that
lay in his path at just about the time of sunset. Heavy forests clothed
both banks of the stream, which was fully a mile in width. He could
see no smoke of fires, or any sign of human life, in any direction.
After eating a little of the pemmican from his bag, he made a couch of
spruce-branches and lay down to sleep, without building a fire.

Jumping Wolf slept soundly until midnight, when he was awakened by the
noise of something moving close beside him. He did not spring to his
feet, or even sit up; but he put his hand on his knife and waited, with
every sense on the alert. Again he heard the sounds that had awakened
him, and he knew that a bear was close by but moving slowly away. He
strained his eyes in the dim starlight, and managed, at last, to detect
the vague shape of the animal against the surrounding shadows. Well, a
bear was nothing to be afraid of. Now it had ceased to move; but by the
sounds it made it was evidently engaged in devouring something, with
ponderous relish.

I wonder what the black glutton has found? muttered Jumping Wolf, at
the same time feeling about, with his right hand, in the moss beside
his couch. On finding a good-sized stone, he threw it at the disturber
of his slumbers. It was well aimed; and the bear uttered a protesting
grunt and shambled into the woods. The young man listened to the sounds
of the beasts retreat until they faded away in the distance; then he
closed his eyes and returned to his slumbers.

When Jumping Wolf opened his eyes again, with the first flush of
morning light, he discovered that the bag of pemmican was gone from
where he had placed it close beside his couch, the evening before.
Then he remembered the visit of the bear, and sprang to his feet, and
ran to where he had seen the animal during the night. There lay the
bag, ripped open and empty; but a few scraps of the pemmican remained,
scattered about on the ground. At first the young man was angry and
somewhat dismayed. But presently he laughed aloud.

If I had known what you were eating, old glutton, he said, I would
have disturbed your meal with an arrow instead of with a harmless
little stone. But I am glad to see that you were so polite as to leave
me enough for my breakfast.

And with that he stooped down, gathered the fragments of pemmican in
his hands, and ate them with relish; after which he slaked his thirst
at a little spring which trickled from the mossy rocks close beside
him. Then he fastened his bow and quiver of arrows securely together,
tied them high across his shoulders, and stepped down the shore and
into the river. The water felt chilly at first; but the sun was shining
brightly and the mists were quickly dispersing from the wide current.
He waded in, deeper and deeper at every stride, and when the water was
half-way up his breast he leaned forward and struck out with hands
and feet. The strokes of his swimming were long, slow, and powerful,
propelling him easily and steadily across the current. Now his blood
was in a glow, for he was strong and young. The surface of the river
was bright as gold with the level rays of the sun, and the swimmer
rejoiced in the freshness and glory of the morning. Sometimes he
lowered his head so that the bright refreshing water might wash over it.

When Jumping Wolf landed on the farther shore, he felt no fatigue from
his long swim, but began immediately to leap about, and swing his arms,
so as to shake some of the weight of water from his leather clothing.
He unfastened his bow and arrows from his shoulders, returned the
quiver to the left side of his girdle, and replaced the wet bow-string
with a dry one from a water-tight wallet which was attached to his
belt. The restringing of the bow was no more than completed when he
heard the whistle of wings, and on looking up saw three ducks hurtling
toward him with outstretched necks. They saw him, and swerved to one
side; but the bow-string twanged, an arrow swished in the air, and one
of the ducks quacked loudly and fell into the shallow water at the edge
of the river.

Here is my dinner; and it is better than musty pemmican, said the
young man, as he drew forth the arrow and fastened the dead bird to
his belt. Then, very well satisfied with himself, and the world in
general, he continued on the second stage of his westward journey.

Jumping Wolf travelled steadily until noon, then lit a fire by means of
friction--a laborious method of grinding one stick into another--and
broiled the fat duck. He was now at the edge of a great barren, a vast
plain of rocky hummocks, mellow, berry-swarded levels and occasional
clumps of stunted spruces.

The season of the wild harvest was over the land, the days of ripe
berries and falling seeds, and the flocking birds. Snipe and plover
from the farther north, and coveys of ptarmigan, and flocks of snow
birds, fed along the ground and started up on quick wings, on every
side. The sun, wheeling high in the blue, touched that wide, treeless
place with a mellow enchantment that stole into the heart of Jumping
Wolf with pleasant languor--a suggestion of idleness and dreams.
The berry-starred moss on which he reclined was warm as a couch of
fox-skins, and the soft bird-calls, sounding indolently from hummock
and hollow, made music in his ears. A sweet, elusive fragrance, that
was the breath of the warmth and ripeness of the barren, stole into his
brain. Millions of red berries, millions of little, tinted leaves,
innumerable pockets of warm, brown loam, loosed that fragrance on
the air at the soft entreaty of the sun. And the warmth of the sun
penetrated also to the very bones of the young hunter, until he lay at
full length on the moss and sighed with the comfort of it. His eyelids
fluttered down. He had travelled far and swiftly, and crossed a river
full of chilly water; then why should he not lie here for a little
while, basking in the sun, and dream a little of Singing Bird, the
daughter of the chief?

The temptation to rest and dream was strong; but not strong enough to
deaden for long Jumping Wolfs sense of duty. Had not his benefactor,
Run-all-day, trusted him to carry an important message with all speed?
Then how could he throw away good hours of daylight in idle dreaming?
So he forced himself to arise from the warm moss and harden his heart
against the drowsiness of the noon.

[Illustration: HE CLIMBED A HIGH TREE AT THE EDGE OF THE WOOD.]

By nightfall the youth had reached the western margin of the barren,
and made his resting-place for the night beside a brook that ran
through groves of pines and spruces. He had killed two grouse on the
way, and had halted several times to refresh himself with handfuls
of the tart, juicy partridge berries. Again he gathered little
fragments of wood, dry as tinder, laboriously created the speck of red
flame and enlarged it to a cooking-fire. He cooked both the birds, so
that he would not lose time in the morning in preparing his breakfast.

Jumping Wolf reached the great forest of pine, in which stood the
lodge of Wise-as-a-she-wolf, early in the afternoon of the third day
of his journey. He climbed a high tree at the edge of the wood, and
from its top looked far and wide on all sides, studying the features
of the landscape. After a short survey he felt satisfied that this was
the place which the chief had described to him; so, without further
hesitation, he descended to the ground and struck into the wood in
search of the pond of crystal water.

The sun had dipped below the tree-tops, and the western sky was red as
fire, when Jumping Wolf issued from the ranks of straight pine boles
and halted on the margin of the little lake. The oval surface of water
was red with the reflection of the sky, and lay there like a warriors
shield of painted hide. On every side towered the pines, ancient,
gigantic, brooding above the secrets of their still hearts. They were
robed in dusk, and their wide branches were heavy with massed shadows;
but their tops were aflame with the light of the hidden sun. Jumping
Wolf breathed softly. He could hear nothing; there was no sound in all
that enchanted forest save the beating of his own heart. The red faded
from the sky and slipped from the spires of the trees. The lake shone
duskily, lost its glow, clouded and lay like dead ice.

Then the spirit of Jumping Wolf shook itself from the spell that had
stolen about it. He raised his head and shouted the name of the great
magician. The echoes rang quickly back to him, just beyond the narrow
water, in among the pines. The name he had cried clanged about him,
clanged and leaped, shattering the brooding silence of the place with
a note of menace, then dropped to silence again. The young mans heart
was shaken. He glanced backward, over his shoulder, and his muscles
grew tense, as if for a great effort. But what had he to fear in the
wood of the kind magician? His courage returned at that thought, and
again he lifted his voice.

I am Jumping Wolf, he cried, and I bring word from Run-all-day.

His voice rang clear across the little water. But he drew back, as if
threatened by a blow, when the silence closed instantly over the words
he had shouted so bravely. There was no echo. The sound of his voice
had rung high, and fallen dead. And yet the place had clashed with
echo at his first cry. He trembled with a horror of something vague,
gigantic, imminent. He would have turned and fled, dashed blindly away
from this power that loosed and choked the echoes at its will, but he
had no strength to lift his feet from the ground.

A voice spoke to him, by name, from the other side of the dark pond. It
was the voice of the good magician, calm and gentle, as he remembered
having heard it in the village of Run-all-day.

Have no fear, Jumping Wolf. My friends are safe in this forest. Bring
me the message, said the voice.

The young man fought down the terror that still shook him, and with a
great effort of will forced his craven feet to the masters bidding.




CHAPTER XXI

THE QUEST OF THE FEATHERS


Jumping Wolf stumbled around the margin of the lake, felt the touch of
a guiding hand on his arm, and saw, suddenly, the glowing windows of
the magic lodge. Next moment, as the thing would happen in a dream, he
stood within the bright room, staring at the living pictures on the
walls and the lamps that burned so steadily and yet exhaled no smoke.
He uttered an exclamation of wonder, happiness. Surely he had entered
the lodge of the gods! Then he felt a light touch against his knee, and
looking down beheld Run-all-days littlest baby smiling up at him.

What is the message, friend, that you bring from the honest
Run-all-day? inquired the magician, who stood close at his elbow.

I had forgotten it, whispered the youth. It seems a small matter,
a thing to snap ones fingers over, in this beautiful place, and
straightway his eyes began to wander along the walls again and up at
the starlit roof.

You have come a long journey, said Wise-as-a-she-wolf, gently.

The young man sighed and withdrew his gaze from the picture of a battle.

The red feathers are gone from the chiefs lodge, O mighty one, he
said. They were stolen in the night, from the robes of the chiefs
couch, by a stranger named Spotted Seal. We gave chase to the thief,
for a matter of several miles, but he flew like a hawk. And Run-all-day
could not leave the village, so he trusted me to bring you the word,
mighty chief.

The magician looked thoughtful, but not greatly disturbed. With Bright
Robe reduced to harmlessness, he did not foresee any serious difficulty
in recovering possession of the feathers.

In which direction did Spotted Seal fly? he asked.

He started southward, master, replied the youth.

It is well that you arrived to-night, said the magician, for I
intended to set out on a journey early in the morning.

Jumping Wolf thought of how nearly he had given himself to slumber one
noontime, and of how a few hours rest then would have delayed him so
that he would not have reached the pine wood until after the magicians
departure, and so would not have found the magic lodge at all. But he
said nothing of this.

You go on a journey? Then what of the child? he said.

He will be safe and happy, replied Wise-as-a-she-wolf. Everything
that he may require is at his hand, and he will not know that I am gone
from him. But he will know well when I return, and will be glad of it.

I can believe that readily, great chief, for I myself could spend
an hundred years in the contemplation of these wonderful pictures,
replied the young man.

And yet, said the other, thoughtfully, this lodge was never so
wonderful to me as it has become since I brought the baby to it. Now
I find it hard to cross the threshold and go about my business in the
world.

But this was all lost upon Jumping Wolf, who was again intent on the
contemplation of the pictures of life. There was a girl that reminded
him of Singing Bird; and at last he caught sight of the newest picture,
and beheld, with pride and wonder, himself on the sodden ice-cake, and
the big canoe paddled by Run-all-day, and Singing Bird in the bow,
slim and glowing as in her living flesh. Before that picture he stood
fascinated, forgetful of the magician and his surroundings.

Nowhere in the whole world is there such another as little Singing
Bird, he cried, very low, but with a quaver in his voice.

And nowhere, north, east, south, or west, is there so great a magician
as Youth, said Wise-as-a-she-wolf, smiling somewhat pathetically.

The other looked at him swiftly; and though he did not understand, he
felt a vague stirring of pity for the mighty one.

Early in the morning, the magician guided Jumping Wolf out of the
forest of pines and faced him on his way. He gave him a store of food
to last him three days.

Tell the mother that all is well with the littlest warrior, he said,
and say to the chief that I do not hold the loss of the feathers
against him; but that, with the knowledge of them abroad among the
people, I must keep them myself should I win them back, until such time
as the child is ready to use them. Be guarded in your talk about this
lodge of mine, and the way to it, he added.

May I not speak of its wonders to any one? asked the young man.

You need not sit with a silent tongue before the maid, replied
Wise-as-a-she-wolf. I have been young, also, he added, and turned
upon the other a face as boyish as the warriors own.

Then they parted, one going southward and one eastward, and the silence
of the wilderness fell again upon wood and barren. The magician walked
like any common traveller, for a mile or more, pondering deeply. His
thoughts were not of the red feathers, but of the little child playing
by itself in the magic house. Wonderful! Wonderful! he murmured.
How he grows, day by day. And he loves me. My eyes require no magic
keenness to see that he loves me. He sat down on a mossy stone, and
his mind was not on his affairs as the guardian of a nation. He thought
of the child whom he had taken into his care; and he thought how happy
a man might be, a chief of a little village, or even a fisher of cod,
with a woman and children in his lodge. I must not lead him too far in
the knowledge of hidden things, he reflected, or else, in his power,
he will miss the happiness that is his birthright.

At last he got to his feet. I must find those red feathers, he said.
I must hasten in the search of Spotted Seal; and perhaps I can return
to the littlest warrior before night.

Then he hid himself in his magic and sprang into the air on the
moccasins of the wind.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf flew fast and far, scanning the woods and hills
and open places beneath his feet. He flashed, invisible, southward,
eastward, and westward, and descended into many camps and villages, to
look closely at their unsuspecting inhabitants. But nowhere did he find
a man answering to Jumping Wolfs description of Spotted Seal. Just
before the time of sunset, he turned his face toward home, and flew
with more eagerness than he had as yet exhibited during the day. He
would continue his search for Spotted Seal in the morning; but now it
was time for him to tell the story of one or other of the pictures to
the littlest warrior. He felt no great anxiety concerning the feathers.
He was sure to find them in a day or two, before the thief could
accomplish much harm with them, even if he were so minded.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf spent the next day in a fruitless search for the red
feathers. He sought far and wide, and made inquiries for Spotted Seal
at several widely separated villages; but all this without any success.
It was not until the fifth day of his search that an old fisherman, who
lived on the coast of the Narrow Sea, told of how days before, he had
been amazed to see a man running in the air, high above the salt water,
running westward toward the hazy line of that distant shore.

The magician crossed the water without delay, flying unseen from under
the very eyes of the astonished fisherman. He descended to the ground
and took on his visible form, near the camp of a party of Mountain
People. He walked into the camp, a modest, undersized youth, and in
a second a dozen great wolf-dogs had sprung toward him, followed by
several warriors. The dogs were huge beasts, more savage and fearless
than their brothers, the timber wolves, and as strong of jaw and limb.
But under the mild regard of the strangers clear eyes, they halted
in their rush, turned and slunk away. The warriors were also savage
in appearance, and long of limb and hair. They were dark of skin, and
black of eye, like Spotted Seal. The truth is, Spotted Seal had the
blood of these Mountain People strong in his veins; but how this thing
had come about is apart from our story. The warriors, more courageous
than the dogs, continued their advance upon the helpless-looking
stranger.

I would speak with Black Eagle, said the magician, for these people
were well known to him. At that they halted, eyeing him distrustfully.

Black Eagle is our chief, said one, an angular fellow, with sinister
eyes, a scar on his chin, and a spear in his hand. He seemed to be
watching, hungrily, for something to serve as an excuse for an attack
on the visitor.

Yes, he is your chief. I want to speak with him, said the stranger,
quietly.

He is a mighty chief, said the fellow with the scar on his chin. He
does not come to every ones bidding. I will call an old woman to take
your message.

Tell him that Wise-as-a-she-wolf is waiting to talk to him, said the
magician.

At that name the warriors were visibly disturbed, and several of them
slunk away in much the same manner as the dogs had done a few minutes
before.

But he of the scarred chin was of tougher courage. It is not a
difficult thing to mention a great name, he said, sneering and alert.

I must teach you caution, said the magician, who, despite the
goodness of his heart, could not bring himself to love these dark and
bloodthirsty people. So, in a flash, he vanished from their sight. They
uttered a shout of consternation, and the warrior with the sinister
eyes and disfigured chin hurled his spear at the place where the
stranger had stood. In the same instant of time he received a buffet on
the head that laid him flat on the moss.

Black Eagle was soon brought to the magician, who now stood quietly, in
his mild and visible form, calm as if nothing unusual had taken place.
The chief greeted his visitor respectfully, for he knew him of old.

Have you seen a man running on the air, as if he had the moccasins of
the wind on his feet? asked Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

I saw such an one but two days ago. He was flying northward and
westward, toward the Land of Giants, replied the chief of the
mountaineers.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf continued his journey immediately, and soon came to
the borders of that desolate region known as the Land of Giants. Its
inhabitants were people of tremendous stature and physical strength.
They were stupidly savage, and so dull of wit that no argument,
save that of heavier clubs than their own, could move them. And as
they had never met with heavier clubs than their own, no man could
remember that their darkened opinions had ever been changed by outside
influence. The biggest and strongest man was always their chief; and he
remained their chief for just so long as he continued to be bigger and
stronger than any of his people. When illness or old age weakened him
then his chieftainship ended, and perhaps his life, into the bargain.
Wise-as-a-she-wolf knew these people well, though not favourably; so he
paused in his flight and descended to the ground at some distance from
the first of the great lodges. Still invisible, he advanced cautiously
on foot toward the untidy and tremendous structure of tree-trunks in
which dwelt the giant who had been chief of the people at the time of
his last visit to the country. He had not gone more than a dozen paces
before he was halted by the sight of a human body, a lifeless body,
lying face-downward on the moss and stones. At first he thought it was
the body of one of the Mountain People; but, upon drawing nearer, he
saw that the garments of dressed leather, blood-stained and wrinkled
on that stiffened form, were of the pattern common among the warriors
of his own country beyond the Narrow Sea. The feet were bare, but one
of the moccasins lay close by. Very gently he turned the body over; and
the face of the dead man was that of Spotted Seal, as Jumping Wolf had
described it to him.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf turned away from the pitiful thing and went on in
the direction of the great lodge, the shapeless roof of which loomed
above a grove of spruces on the summit of a hill. At last he issued
from the grove and stood in front of, and at a safe distance away from,
the entrance to the giants abode. This entrance was nearly half the
height of the structure and wide in proportion. It looked more like the
mouth of a den than the doorway of a human retreat. Bones of caribou
and moose lay white on the trampled ground; but there was no sign of a
cooking-fire to be seen. The giants ate their meat raw, and were never
known to use fire even in winter, for the sake of its warmth. In the
dusky interior, Wise-as-a-she-wolf detected the outline of a bulky
figure.




CHAPTER XXII

WISE-AS-A-SHE-WOLF AND CRACK BONE THE GIANT


Awake, chief, and come out from your den. Wise-as-a-she-wolf is here
to talk to you, cried the magician, in a formidable voice.

The head and shoulders of the giant immediately appeared, and from
under a fringe of tangled hair a pair of alert eyes, gray as ice,
glared about on every side and up in the air. The giants face was
covered with untidy, yellow whiskers. His forehead sloped back sharply
from his eyebrows, and his nose was flat. He crouched on all-fours, and
in one massive hand, which rested on the ground, he grasped the smaller
end of a trimmed pine-tree. The magician thought of the littlest
warrior, far away and alone in the magic lodge, and decided to act with
discretion.

[Illustration: THE HEAD AND SHOULDERS OF THE GIANT IMMEDIATELY
APPEARED, AND FROM UNDER A FRINGE OF TANGLED HAIR A PAIR OF ALERT EYES,
GRAY AS ICE, GLARED ABOUT.]

Is it you, little great-man? said the giant, in a voice that was not
unlike the growling of a beast. I dont see you, he continued. Show
yourself and come nearer. Old Crack Bone is ready to talk to you.

I can talk to you very well from where I am, replied
Wise-as-a-she-wolf. All I want to know is, have you seen anything of
two little red feathers?

I was afraid you had come to slay us all, mighty powerful one, said
the giant, with a thunderous chuckle. We might wade across to that
little island of yours some day, and eat all your caribou and kill all
your people, he added.

And that will be time enough for me to slay you. Now I want you to
give me the two red feathers which you took from the feet of the dead
man, replied the magician.

Was he one of your warriors? asked the giant. When I saw him flying
along, like a bird, I thought it was the great Wise-as-a-she-wolf
himself. So I just threw a little bone into the air, to attract his
attention, and down he came, so hard that his life was knocked right
out of him. Then he shook with horrible laughter at the remembrance.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf would never fly near you, without first making
himself invisible. He knows you too well to trust you, replied the
magician, sternly.

The poor fellow whom you killed was not one of my people, he
continued, but the feathers are mine, for all that, and I must ask you
to give them to me immediately.

How can I give them to you, when I cant see you? inquired the giant,
with a grin.

If you will kindly lay them on the top of your lodge, replied the
other.

Little great-one, said Crack Bone, I am not afraid of you, or any
magician, or anything alive under the sun. You can hide from my eye;
but that does me no harm. As for the feathers, my brave warrior, why,
I intend to keep them for my own use. They are of such virtue that,
when I put them in my moccasins I can jump twice as high as my head.
With a little more practice, I shall be able to fly as well as that
unfortunate young man was flying before I tossed the shank-bone of a
moose at him.

The magician was very angry at that, and felt a strong desire to
increase his size and close in deadly combat with the giant. But he
remembered the battle with Bright Robe, and the injuries then received,
and thought of what might happen to the baby in the distant lodge if
he should be disabled by the giant. So he changed his position, took a
small stone from the ground, breathed upon it, and threw it into the
roof of the giants lodge. Next moment the whole structure was a mass
of flames, and the giant, with a howl of rage, had scrambled from the
dangerous place and hurled his club at where he thought the magician
was standing. The huge weapon struck a clump of young spruce trees and
broke them as if they were twigs; but the magician stood safe.

Will you play any more of your magic on Crack Bone? roared the giant,
as he jumped again and again upon the fallen timber and threshed about
with his club. Wise-as-a-she-wolf made no sound. Before Crack Bone had
desisted from his violent dance, half a dozen of his people arrived on
the scene, shouting questions and staring with amazement at the great
pile of blazing timber that had so lately been the chiefs lodge. At
last Crack Bone leaned on his club, and, between gasps for breath (for
the smoke from his burning den blew about him), answered some of their
questions.

It was that little magician, Wise-as-a-she-wolf, from across the salt
water, he said. He came for the red feathers. He told me to give him
back those fine red feathers. But he wont need them now.

Crack Bone laughed victoriously, and drew the tiny feathers from some
safe hiding-place about his person. He held them up, between his great
fingers, so that all might see. Then, bending down, he slipped one into
each of his moccasins. The magician sprang high into the air, at sign
of these preparations, and hung at a safe distance above the savage
group, watchful but invisible.

Stand aside, friends, roared Crack Bone. Now I have the magic
feathers under my feet and I intend to jump about, so dont stand too
close.

The other giants fell back the distance of a few of their own great
strides. Then Crack Bone gathered himself together and leaped upward
with all the strength of his massive legs. Up he shot, high above the
surrounding tree-tops, struggled in the air for a few seconds and sank
back to earth. The magic of the feathers was not strong enough to keep
his mountain-like body afloat. His friends were greatly impressed by
this display of agility, and shouted until the earth rang. But the
magician, high and unseen, only smiled.

I fear nothing, cried the giant, to his people. Wise-as-a-she-wolf
angered me, and now where is he? He set the red fire to eat my house
to dust, but he was not strong enough to save his own life. Oh, I am
strong and mighty, and have flying magic under my feet. At that he
began to jump here and there, so recklessly that the other giants moved
sullenly away.

I think the feathers are safe in his keeping, said the magician. He
cannot harm my people with them, for they cannot lift so great a weight
across the Narrow Sea. Some other time, when the littlest warrior is
older and stronger, I shall return and win the feathers back. I shall
always know where to find them.

With that, he set his face again in the direction of his own country
and his own lodge, and flashed through the air with all the speed of
the moccasins of the wind; and far behind and below, Crack Bone, the
chief of the giants, continued to caper and shout before his blazing
house.

Within a hundred yards of the giant, in the top of a fir-tree, perched
a little brown owl. He sat very still; but his yellow eyes were full
of light and eagerness and cunning. He watched the stupid giant
leaping and skipping on the magic feathers, and was glad that he had
visited this desolate country.




CHAPTER XXIII

HOW CRACK BONE WAS DOUBLY OUTWITTED


This little brown owl that had been a spectator of the whole of
Wise-as-a-she-wolfs interview with Crack Bone, and that now sat and
watched the giant prancing victoriously, was none other than Bright
Robe. He, too, believed that his enemy had been disabled by the giants
club and trodden to helplessness by the giants feet. Otherwise, the
magician would surely have replied to the giants attack. One who could
throw magic fire onto the roof of a lodge could as easily throw it
against a mans body. But he knew that his enemy was not dead, however
his body might be crushed and broken. He was aware that no mortal hand,
either of giant or magician, could kill Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

The owl had crossed the Narrow Sea some time before Crack Bones
capture of the red feathers. He had visited the camps of the
mountaineers, and the lodges of several magicians, and the caves of
a fierce people still farther to the westward, and the lodges of the
fat, blubber-eating people far to the northward; but, remembering his
experiences in his own country, he had not made himself known to any
one. He had practised the same discretion with the giants.

After the house was burned to the ground, Crack Bone strode up the
hill and took possession of a lodge belonging to one of his people.
The rightful owner was very angry, but he made no objections. He knew
that he was no match for the chief, especially now that the chief was
so light on his feet. The little owl followed Crack Bone, at a safe
distance, watched him remove the feathers from his moccasins and tuck
them under his belt, and then flew away to where some of the giants had
thrown a number of fresh bones that were not entirely devoid of flesh.
He ate his fill, keeping a sharp look-out all the while for foxes, and
then returned to spy on the giant and the magic feathers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Day after day the little brown owl kept watch over the actions of
the chief of the giants. He followed the great savage on his hunting
expeditions, watching him strike down moose and caribou and bear. In
that desolate country summer was already past, and the owl was cold,
for he had not yet made himself a winter retreat. The rivers and ponds
froze and snow fell thick out of the gray skies; and still the owl
followed Crack Bone or perched near his lodge, cold but determined. At
last his alertness and watchfulness were rewarded. Crack Bone had been
hunting and had used the red feathers, and the bird had followed him
close, drifting from tree to tree. On reaching his lodge, Crack Bone
immediately drew his moccasins from his feet and removed the feathers
from them. It was now evening, and falling snow added to the gloom.
The giant had killed three caribou; and just when in the act of hiding
the feathers under his belt, he heard a sound of furtive movements
near the spot where he had thrown the dead animals. He listened for
a moment, then placed the feathers on a stone in the doorway of his
lodge and sprang in the direction of the sound that had disturbed him.
The owl fluttered to the ground, picked up the feathers in his beak,
and flew away. He flew at his best speed, straight ahead through the
gloom and the whirling snow. At last he alit in a great pine-tree and
hid the feathers in a crevice in the bark. They would be safe there
until morning. Then he snapped his beak and fluttered his wings. The
red feathers were his, all ready to be placed in his moccasins when the
enchantment was removed from him.

I have done what Wise-as-a-she-wolf failed to do, he chuckled.

Crack Bone did not reach the place where he had left the carcasses of
the caribou a moment too soon. Stone Hand, the giant whose house he had
so unceremoniously taken, was turning away with all three of the bodies
in his arms. Crack Bone struck at him with his fist; but Stone Hand
avoided the blow by leaping to one side; and letting two of the frozen
carcasses fall to the ground, he swung the other by the hind legs and
smote the chief across the head with it. The blow staggered Crack Bone
for a moment; but only for a moment. His skull was far too thick to be
injured by any weapon so light and yielding as the body of a stag. He
reeled a little, bellowed with anger, and clutched at Stone Hand. But
he missed his mark in the swirling gloom, and the thief dashed away.
Crack Bone stooped, lifted a great stone from the ground, and hurled
it blindly after the mutinous one. Then, yanking a small tree from
the frozen ground, to serve him as a club, he dashed into the storm
and darkness in mad pursuit. Stone Hand turned sharply, and headed for
the unpeopled wilds; but Crack Bone ran straight on, until he stumbled
among the lodges of his people. They were upon him in a moment,
striking blindly with all manner of weapons. Logs flew from the tops of
the houses, and everybody hit at whatever was within reach. Crack Bone
received some painful blows while he scrambled on all-fours. He got
to his feet, and swung his improvised club recklessly but with great
execution. Lodges and giants were overturned, in a horrible uproar that
frightened the wild animals for miles around. Everyone fought; but none
knew what the fight was about or whom he fought with. All were fighting
mad.

Stone Hand sat down and listened to the roars of combat from afar.
Since that old Crack Bone killed the magician and got hold of the
jumping feathers, he said, he thinks he is the master of the world.
He took my fine, warm house away from me; and now I believe he has
attacked the whole tribe.

He grunted and fell to devouring the one caribou that remained in his
possession. He was hungry, for most of the game had moved southward
since the coming of winter; and of late only Crack Bone, with the red
feathers on his feet, had been able to overtake the herds. After eating
the last bit of raw meat, Stone Hand lay down between two small hills
and fell asleep. The snow span about him, and covered him from head to
foot, as if he were a mountain. But he was full of food--that is, he
had just enjoyed a moderate meal--so he slumbered soundly. For a long
time the tumult of the distant battle continued to sift vaguely into
his dreams.

The sun was above the horizon when Stone Hand opened his eyes. For
a little while he wondered why he was not under cover, and stared
stupidly at the hills on either side. He felt stiff and cold; but
soon got to his feet and shook the snow from his limbs and body, and
brushed it from his hair and face with his hands. Now he remembered
how he had stolen the three caribou from the chief. He chuckled at the
recollections of his escape and of the sounds of furious combat behind
him. Now all was quiet, as if there had never been a shout, or the
thump of a descending club, since the beginning of the world. He armed
himself with a great piece of green timber and set out cautiously for
the village, crawling on hands and knees. Now, in broad daylight, the
familiar fear of the chief had returned to him. So he advanced slowly,
and kept as close to the ground as he could. At last, peering over
the top of a wooded hill, he obtained a clear view of the place which
he had left so hurriedly the previous night. He gazed at the scene in
amazement, for scarcely one of the lodges stood entire. Many were flat
on the ground and the massive timbers and rocks of which they had been
constructed lay scattered on all sides. Many others were unroofed. The
surrounding trees were uprooted and broken, and the snow was trampled
and stained with blood for hundreds of yards in every direction. And as
for the inhabitants of this demolished village,--why, they seemed to be
even in a worse way than their lodges. Some lay motionless on the snow,
and others sat or reclined about their fallen homes, awkwardly dressing
their wounds and groaning with pain. Not a giant of all that terrible
company was able to stand on his feet.

As soon as an understanding of the true state of affairs got into Stone
Hands thick head, he stood upright and advanced fearlessly. He walked
among his fallen tribesmen and grinned at them heartlessly. His glances
rested on old Crack Bone, who sat with his head in his hands, and he
looked both savage and jovial.

I am your chief now, he said. Does any one dispute my right?

Groans were his only answer. Crack Bone did not so much as remove his
hands from his head, which, I believe, he was doing his best to hold
together.

I am your chief, continued Stone Hand, so I will go and hunt. If I
kill more than I can eat myself I will give you some. But I must have
the magic feathers on my feet, for the herds are far to the southward.
Where are the feathers? he asked, turning to Crack Bone.

The ex-chief groaned, and mumbled something to the effect that he
neither knew nor cared.

Give them to me, roared Stone Hand, angrily. I am the chief now.

Then Crack Bone tried to explain, with many grunts and moans, that the
feathers were not to be found; that he had laid them down on a stone in
front of his lodge and that some one had stolen them during the fight.
But, of course, the new and self-elected chief did not believe a word
of it.

Give them to me, he bellowed, swinging his club around the others
head. But Crack Bone sullenly persisted in his story of the loss of
the magic feathers. So Stone Hand searched him, despite his cries and
bellowings at the pain of it; and he did not find them.

The little owl, in the meantime, had discovered a deep hole, high up
in a great birch tree. It was the deserted nest of a woodpecker. He
dropped the feathers into the hole; and down they fell, quite out of
his reach.

They will be safe there, he said. When I am ready to use them I will
break the tree to splinters and take them out.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE MAGICIANS AWAKE


The seasons passed, with melting snow, waning summers and scattering
seeds. Many moons were born, each to grow and dwindle, and leave behind
it in the blackness the germ of another moon. The herds of caribou
moved southward and northward again, hunted by men and wolves, yet ever
multiplying. The tribes grew; warriors did deeds of valour; death and
pride and love moved among the lodges. Children were born; old people
and strong hunters and little children set their feet on the Longest
Trail. The north loosed its fields of ice in spring-time, freighted
with cold and fogs and millions of seals; and so it had been since the
beginning of things.

Run-all-days village grew like the herds, and like the forests in the
sheltered valleys, until it became a great clan. Run-all-day had lost
nothing of his authority with the loss of the magic feathers, for his
people loved him. He was the head-chief of the clan, and under him
were four lesser chiefs, among whom was Jumping Wolf, the young warrior
from the south. And Jumping Wolf had a lodge of his own, and Singing
Bird was his wife.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf kept close to his magic house, for it seemed that
his whole heart was with the littlest warrior. He named the child
Featherfoot, for the magic feathers were to be his, and his alone, as
soon as they were won back from Crack Bone, the giant. But the magician
seemed to be in no haste to make that long journey again. There would
be plenty of time for it later; and now he had so many things to teach
the child. Little Featherfoot learned readily, for he grew, both in
brain and body, at twice the rate of an ordinary child. And so, when he
was in his sixth summer, he was as large as a boy of twelve summers,
and knew magic that was beyond the understanding of any save the great
magicians. He could make fire in a moment, even as Wise-as-a-she-wolf
had done to burn the lodge of Crack Bone. His bow would send an arrow
the distance of six flights of an ordinary arrow, and no weapon,
unless it were tipped with magic, could break or pierce his shield of
thin leather. He could take upon himself the semblance of a wolf, a
caribou, or a bear, and at such times his speed was as the speed of
the former animals and his strength as that of the latter. Also, he
could make light objects heavy, and heavy objects as light as birch
bark.

While Bright Robe hid in desolate places, harmless but expectant, and
the good magician sat in his lodge, and Run-all-days people prospered
and grew, men were blowing on red coals in almost every camp and
village in the island. And the coals they blew upon were the memories
of old battles, and they were red with the fires of old hatreds. The
fires leaped up and touched their flames to the hearts of the warriors.
The tribes had been too long at peace with one another. In the south,
and the east, and the west, they made their war-arrows; and the lonely
hunters and fishers of the north heard of it and returned to their
villages, with the lust of fighting in their hearts. And Run-all-day
felt the stirring of the trouble in the air, and armed his men, and
sent swift and cunning messengers to spy upon the other clans.

I was once a peaceful hunter and fisher, said he, to Red Willow, but
now I am the chief of a people. If the men of other villages come
against me, then must I do battle with them, to the best of my ability.
It is stupid to fight without cause; but it is better to fight, and
give back blows for every one received, than to crouch in ones lodge
and die like a frightened hare.

Being but a man, after all, he prayed in his heart that his master,
the good magician, would not pacify the tribes until he had proved his
little army. There was fighting blood in him; and a flame of that red
coal that had lain ash-hidden for so long a time, had got into his
honest heart.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf told Featherfoot the story of the red feathers; and
about two months before the time that Bright Robe would return to his
old form and power, he set out for the land of the giants, armed with
magic weapons, to bring Crack Bone to terms. But Crack Bone was dead
and Stone Hand ruled in his place. When the magician asked word of the
feathers, the true story of the fight and of their sudden disappearance
was told to him, first by Stone Hand and afterward by several others of
the giants. Wise-as-a-she-wolf was disturbed at the news, and blamed
himself for not having taken the feathers from Crack Bone long ago.
Also, he knew nothing of the whereabouts of Bright Robe, and this,
too, disturbed the peace of his mind. He set to work immediately to
find the red feathers. He hunted far and wide, questioning the people
of many tribes. He went north, to the farthest village, and southward
to the great wooded countries, where are thousands of red-skinned
people, and fields of corn, and trees bearing fruits. But nowhere did
he hear any word of the red feathers. For the space of two moons he
sought the lost treasures; but at last he turned homeward, and ran
upon the air, with all the speed of the moccasins of the wind, for a
day and a night and a day. When he came to the western coast of his
own country, he saw below him, lying black and lifeless, the ruins of
a village. Then he knew that the tribes were at war again; and again
he blamed himself for having neglected his duties toward his people.
He descended to the ground and saw the bodies of men, with wounds upon
them, and broken weapons.

Bright Robe, in the meantime, was tasting the joy of his old ways
again. The moment he had returned to his old shape, he had increased
his man-strength an hundred times and splintered the pine-tree. Then
he had placed the feathers in his moccasins and crossed the Narrow
Sea. Again he was the master of his magic; and though he had lost the
silver robe that had turned him invisible at will, the newly acquired
feathers more than made up for the loss. But he had learned discretion
during his five summers spent in the shape of an owl, and so was
content to go quietly among the islanders for a little while, making no
demonstrations of his power. He even concealed his identity and avoided
the lodges of people who knew him. He made himself agreeable by many
fires, talked modestly, and listened attentively to the words of old
men and warriors. And so he learned that his enemy, Wise-as-a-she-wolf,
had been very quiet of late, and that all the clans were uneasy with
war-lust. He knew that the power of Wise-as-a-she-wolf would suffer
if the people fought, for those who suffered would feel that he had
withdrawn his protection from them, and those who conquered would
know that they had done so without any help from him. Therefore he
was anxious to see the islanders battling among themselves, and after
considering the matter, and investigating the relative strengths of the
larger clans and their leaders, he disclosed himself to the chief of
the people of a great district in the south. This chief was a veritable
king, with four villages and hundreds of miles of hunting country
under his rule. His name was Cold Wind, and his heart was harder than
the ice-fields of the north. So to him Bright Robe made himself known,
and offered to give him assistance in the battle and at the council
fire.

Cold Wind dared not refuse Bright Robes offer; but he was not pleased
at having a greater person than himself on the scene. The warriors were
called together, armed for battle, and the campaign was begun with the
destruction of that village in which lived the old woman called Hot
Tongue, and those great warriors, Yellow Fox, Seven Knives, Strong
Hunter, and Mighty Hand. Bright Robe had no pleasant memories of that
village; so the people were slain, and the lodges robbed of their
treasures of fur and food and then burned to the ground. The victorious
fighting-parties travelled westward then and destroyed many little
villages. But the clans rose on every side to stem the course of Cold
Winds people; so Bright Robe retired from the scene of action, knowing
that the mischief was well begun.

Bright Robe did not want to attract Wise-as-a-she-wolfs attention
again, for he knew that he was neither strong nor cunning enough to
withstand that great magician. So he left Cold Wind and the warriors,
and crossed the island, to continue quietly in his evil ways. And at
every village and every camp he questioned the people concerning his
enemys whereabouts and affairs. The people had heard nothing of the
great magician for several seasons, so Bright Robe learned nothing by
his questionings. He began to believe and hope that Wise-as-a-she-wolf
had left the country.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf returned to his lodge and told Featherfoot of his
journey, and of its fruitlessness. Of this matter, and of the signs of
warfare which he had beheld in the west, he spoke at length. The child
was eager to go in search of the feathers, but of that the magician
would not hear.

May I help my people in the fighting? he asked. With my magic, I am
already stronger than any warrior, and with my shield I can turn aside
the heaviest and swiftest arrow. I have no fear, master, and yet I know
the value of caution. With the knowledge that you have taught me, even
now I would be a help to my people.

Nay, cried the good magician, sorely troubled. Nay, you are still
but a child at heart, for all your size and strength. Your hand would
stay in the stroke, for very pity, even when your life was at risk.
Keep the protection of this lodge, and I am your friend. Your people
shall be under my special protection until such time as I can show the
clans the foolishness of this strife among themselves.

It was for love of this child that Wise-as-a-she-wolf had postponed the
contest with the giant, and by that had lost the magic feathers; and
now, for the father-love in his heart, he wanted to keep the child in
the safety of the lodge, where the very powers that he had given him
were of no use to mankind.




CHAPTER XXV

THE UNFINISHED BATTLE


Run-all-days fighting force consisted of about one hundred and
forty warriors, well armed and trained. Every man of them could
shoot straight and strong with the bow, and throw his club and
spear with accuracy and force. All had strong shields with which to
guard their bodies, and blades of flint in their belts for use in
hand-to-hand grapplings. There were scouts lurking afar, to the south
and west,--swift runners to bring word to the village of the trend
and progress of the different battles and war-parties. The village
was enclosed in a breast-high fence of brush and tree-trunks, and the
warriors kept within easy reach of the lodges, ready to answer a call
to arms at any time of the day or night.

It was early of a June morning when two runners entered the village
gasping for breath, and told the chief that they had seen several
war-parties at a distance of about four hours journey to the
southward. They had found them at night, asleep around small fires, and
were not certain of their numbers. They were lying on the ground close
as the stones in the bed of a river, each rolled in his sleeping-robe
and looking very long and broad in the uncertain light. Run-all-day
called the lesser chiefs and most experienced warriors into his lodge,
and a council of war was held without delay. Jumping Wolf volunteered
to set out immediately, with a small party of the swiftest among the
young men, to spy upon the approaching enemy and return with word of
their strength.

It is a good plan, said Run-all-day; and the others nodded their
heads. So Jumping Wolf selected six youths to accompany him, and left
the village. They carried no arms save the knives in their belts; but
their shields, spears, and clubs were to be held in readiness against
their return.

When Jumping Wolf had been gone an hour, the councils plans were
settled. A chief named Tall Pine advanced into the hilly, wooded
country to the southward, close along the eastern shore of the stream,
with thirty men. His orders were to halt and take cover a mile from the
village, throwing his men in a thin line across the probable course of
the enemy. This line was to let the leading body of the enemy pass
through it, and then close in, on the flanks of the invaders, with fire
of arrows and spears. Another force of thirty warriors, with a chief
named Red Sky in command, took position a few hundred yards in rear of
the other, where the river begins to widen into the bay, and spread
from the rocks of the coast across the front of the village. This party
was to strike the enemy in front, at the first sounds of conflict. Both
these parties were to fall back upon the main body, after loosing a
few volleys and striking a few swift blows. The main body, consisting
of over seventy men, and led by Run-all-day and several other chiefs,
lay in close ranks in front of the village, well hidden among rocks and
brush.

It was about three hours before noon when Jumping Wolfs party returned
from the scouting and joined the advance line, where their arms and
shields were awaiting them. They had run far and fast, had seen the
enemy advancing in three lines, and had returned at top speed. Jumping
Wolf reported the number of the enemy as close upon three hundred.
A fresh runner was sent back with the information, and the scouts
remained with Tall Pine.

An hour passed--two hours passed--and still the wilderness lay quiet
under the warm and high-wheeling sun. Jumping Wolf crawled away from
the line of impatient warriors and slipped into the rugged places. He
was soon back again, and crouched beside Tall Pine.

They are within bow-shots distance, he whispered. The leading party
will touch that open hillside, and he pointed with his finger.

The word went along the line, and every concealed warrior fixed his
gaze on the rocky slope indicated, and set the notches of arrows to
the taut strings. The figure of a man appeared suddenly from the
scrubby growth above the clearing. He stood upright and gazed ahead,
and on every side, under a shading hand. At last, evidently satisfied
with the result of his survey, he waved his arm and advanced further
into the open. He stooped, and took advantage of every bit of cover,
moving swiftly forward all the while. They came after him quickly and
noiselessly, every man following the tactics of the leader in crossing
the open space. The party numbered more than seventy warriors. Upon
reaching the foot of the slope, where the ground was rough and lightly
wooded, they closed in an irregular formation and increased their
speed. They seemed to be in a great hurry to add one more smoking
village to the list of their military achievements. They hastened
along, four and five abreast, close-ranked, lulled to carelessness by
the ease of former victories.

The twanging of bow-strings opened the battle-music, and the arrows
swished and struck. The invaders scattered, and sprang to right and
left in search of Tall Pines hidden warriors; and from either side the
arrows continued to leap from rock and bush and tree. The long shafts
rattled across the shields and stood deep in flesh and muscle; and even
while the invaders dashed here and there, Red Sky appeared in front
of them, with his thirty men, and advanced swiftly behind a shower of
arrows. The leader of the enemy rallied his scattered fighters and led
them against the new arrivals; but only forty of his seventy were able
to join the charge. Red Sky met them with a flight of spears; and at
the same moment the bow-men under Tall Pine and Jumping Wolf sprang
into sight and closed upon their rear.

Soon the victors were busy collecting arrows, drawing them from dead
bodies and gathering them up from the ground. A few had wounds to
bind, but only a few. It had been a swift and easy victory for the
skirmishers of Run-all-days army, and not more than a dozen of the
invaders had escaped death by flight.

Suddenly more of the enemy issued from the woods above the open
hillside, and rushed down the slope, score after score. It was the main
body, numbering more than two hundred fighting-men. They came at their
best pace, wondering, no doubt, why the sounds of combat had ceased;
perhaps believing that Run-all-day was already overthrown, and in haste
to join in the looting of the village. By the time the scene of the
fight was reached, only the dead awaited them.

The sixty victors fell noiselessly back and joined the double line of
defenders in front of the village. Word of the brief fight and of the
approach of the main body of the enemy passed from mouth to mouth.
Then all lay still, close to the ground, and breathlessly awaited the
arrival of the invaders. They had a fairly clear view of the land for
several hundred yards in front of their coverts. At last the vanguard
of the enemy appeared among the little hummocks and clumps of trees,
and a great shout went up from them at the sight of what appeared to
them an unprotected village. Of what account is a barrier of brush if
there are no warriors to strengthen it?

Then, standing upright between the hidden defenders and the invaders
swiftly forming line for attack, appeared the figure of a young man in
garments of dressed leather, richly decorated. The advance was halted,
and the warriors of Run-all-day held their arrows.

Go back to your villages, cried the young man to the southerners.
You have shed too much blood of your own countrymen. Turn on your
trail of blood and ashes, and go back to your deserted lodges.

It is the good magician. It is Wise-as-a-she-wolf, whispered
Run-all-days warriors.

Who speaks so mightily? cried a young chief from the ranks in front.
Are we to be turned back by a voice, who have scattered the people of
ten encampments? and he bent his bow.

Yes! Though the voice has been silent over-long, replied the
magician. Unstring your bows, and return to your own lands, and mourn
the ruin you have done.

At that the young chief raised his bow.

Loose the arrow, fool, cried the other; and the arrow flew. And he
extended his hand and plucked it from the air and dropped it, harmless,
to the ground.

I am Wise-as-a-she-wolf, whom men once called Highest Star, said the
magician. Is this your gratitude for a hundred seasons of protection?

Let us at them, master, cried Run-all-day, springing to his feet.

The magician halted and silenced the great chief with a gesture of his
hand. Then he advanced upon the wavering southerners who lusted for
blood and the treasures of the village in spite of the fear in their
hearts.

All the people of this island are my people, else would I strike you
for your sins of greed and blood-thirstiness, said Wise-as-a-she-wolf,
walking steadily forward.

The master is angry. I hear it in his voice. He will strike them in
his wrath, whispered Run-all-day to a man beside him.

True, the magician was angry, for all the gentleness of him; and the
anger shone in his eyes, and scattered the men of the south before him.
They ran to right and left, but they did not turn back toward their own
villages. And the young chief who had loosed the arrow, called the
more daring of his followers to stand firm. So wicked was his heart,
and so full was it of vanity, that he knew nothing of discretion. He
hurled two spears, in quick succession, at the good magician.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf snatched the spears from the air, stood for a second
with one in either hand, and then vanished from the sight of friend
and foe. Next moment the arrogant young chief lay dead on the ground,
struck down by an invisible weapon. At that, the invaders turned and
ran southward, frantic with terror, each warrior expecting immediate
death from the unseen hand. Wise-as-a-she-wolf knew that their hearts
were hard, and that their lesson was not yet learned, so he ordered
Run-all-day and his warriors to follow the fugitives and deliver six
flights of arrows.

Not more than half of the three hundred southern warriors got safely
back to their own country; and they were spent and sore, and full
of regret for their misdeeds. Also, they were none the richer for
their great campaign, for they had retreated so whole-heartedly from
Run-all-days village, that they had thrown away their spoils of former
victories to lighten their flight. The women and children and old men
jeered the survivors and mourned the dead with a great and depressing
noise. All the villages of that region suffered hunger, for the fishing
and hunting had been long neglected.

Scarcely had they settled in their lodges again, humbled and sad,
before Wise-as-a-she-wolf appeared among them, and unseated the
remaining chiefs and set others in authority. After which, seeing that
their vanity was broken, he drove a herd of caribou close to their
village, that they might have food with which to support their lives
while they mended their ways. He made medicines for the sick among the
women and children and old men, and gave healing salves to some of the
wounded warriors. Then he left them, and flew upon his magic moccasins
to quell other clans and still the fighting in every quarter of the
island. In some cases he punished and in others he showed mercy, always
reading the hearts of the people. So, in a few days, he had brought the
island to peace again and struck all the evil counsellors, save Bright
Robe, with his wrath.

But Bright Robe he could not find, though he heard from many that
he had been in the country, urging the clans to warfare and flying
through the air like a bird.

So he knew that the red feathers were in the possession of his rival
again, and vowed to his heart that he would seek him over the length
and breadth of the world.




CHAPTER XXVI

BRIGHT ROBES DISCRETION


While Bright Robe was yet a little brown owl, watching the pine-tree in
which he had hidden the red feathers, far away in the Land of Giants,
old Whispering Grass had gathered her herbs and roots together, and
gone down into a valley where some families of her own kin had built
themselves a village. Little Heron, the chief of this village, was
her grandson. He was a quiet man, of a good heart and contented mind,
and he received the old medicine-woman with warmth and respect, and
gave her a fine lodge in which to brew her doses and dream her ancient
dreams.

I am an old woman now, Whispering Grass had told him, on the day of
her arrival, and my blood has so little of glow in it that the winds
on the mountain shake me with the fear of death. Also, it is hard for
me to travel in the forests and gather the leaves and roots, and the
very cooking of food has become a weariness. So I have crawled from my
lonely house, with much labour and pain, to this warm valley, that I
may teach my knowledge of curing human ills to some one who will live
many years. And I want to die warm, with women of my own clan beside
me, and a bright fire before the doorway of the lodge.

Little Heron and his people treated the old woman with kindness and
respect. Her lodge was warm with the pelts of animals, and all her
food was cooked for her by the wife of the chief. Little children came
about her, to hear the wonderful stories that were half of memory and
half of invention. And to several of the young women of the village she
taught all that she knew of the science of medicine. One day she told
Little Heron the story of the battle between Wise-as-a-she-wolf and
Bright Robe, and of how Bright Robe had been stripped of his powers for
five seasons, and turned into the shape of a little owl, by the good
magician. She told of Bright Robes hate of her, and of her fear that
he should seek her and kill her when his evil power was returned to him.

For a winter and a summer she lived in peace and comfort with her
kinsfolk; and before she died she warned Little Heron once more
against Bright Robe, and gave to Star Flower, the chiefs little
daughter, a whistle made of willow, small and wrinkled; and with her
last breath she told the child the virtue of the whistle.

When the clans were rising on every side, the strong to raid, and the
weaker to defend their homes, Little Heron remained quietly in his
valley and told his people that warfare was more dangerous than any
form of labour and utterly without profit to the greatest warriors. His
people listened and nodded their heads, for they believed Little Heron
to be one of the wisest men in the world. Later, when a fugitive from
some distant battle staggered into their valley and told them of the
bloodshed and ruin, and of the evil advice of Bright Robe, they were
doubly convinced of their chiefs wisdom. And the women who had learned
the science of medicine from Whispering Grass, cured the stranger of
his hurts; and he, poor warrior, was so charmed with the treatment and
the quiet, that he married one of his doctors and became a member of
Little Herons village. That was wise of him, for even while he lay
sick of his wounds the lodges of his own people were blazing like a
hundred torches.

Though the horrors of war passed by the village in the secluded
valley, Bright Robe found his way to it. And this was the manner of
his coming and his going. As soon as the fighting was well commenced
and every man slaying or being slain, robbing or being robbed, in a
satisfactory manner, the evil magician retired to secluded places, and
desisted from flying above the tree-tops, except at night, for fear
of Wise-as-a-she-wolf, of whose whereabouts he knew nothing. While he
skulked about, trying to decide upon some plan of action, he remembered
his old grudge against Whispering Grass. So he made his way straight to
the little clearing on the mountain, the scene of his ignoble defeat
five seasons before. But he found nothing but an empty lodge with
tattered sides and rotted poles. Moss was creeping over the floor of
beaten earth, and the thousand little fires at which the old woman had
brewed her medicines were covered with forest growth.

Death has cheated me of my revenge, reflected Bright Robe.

Wandering aimlessly about, he happened upon the valley in which dwelt
the peace-loving Little Heron and his contented people. Here, perhaps,
he could rest for awhile in safety and make trouble before stealing
away. It looked, to his wicked eye, like a place sadly in need of
trouble. He descended into the valley and the cluster of lodges, and
was met by the chief.

I am a poor hunter, who lived alone beside the River of the Beavers,
he said. Six nights ago I was attacked by a party of fighting-men, and
fled for my life. Ever since then I have wandered, homeless. My lodge
is flat on the ground and my stores and furs are stolen.

Little Heron gazed at the evil black eyes of the stranger, and,
remembering Whispering Grasss descriptions of Bright Robe, knew him
for the evil magician. He showed nothing of this in face or manner, but
invited the stranger into his lodge and called for food of the best to
be brought, and a little of the liquor of crushed berries. Bright Robe
ate and drank with zest, and in his heart chuckled at the simplicity
of Little Heron. He glanced about him with his keen eyes, noting every
sign of peace and prosperity with delight.

What a change shall be here, in the space of a few days, he thought,
and forcing a smile, congratulated the chief on his good food and
comfortable condition.

The war has not touched you, he said. You are fortunate, chief; for
here am I, a lover of peace and honesty, ruined and a fugitive. The
gods are blind when the strong clans go forth with their war-shields.
If one does not kill, then must he be killed, or else run away.

You speak truth, replied Little Heron, as he removed a broiled snipe
from the fire and placed it before his guest. When the clans go to
war, urged on by the lust in their blood and the evil tongues of wicked
magicians, then tis a sad time for the peaceful and honest. But this
is a small village, well hidden, and far from the great chiefs, and my
people are a quiet, home-staying folk. And having escaped for so long,
I have nothing to fear, for Wise-as-a-she-wolf, the good magician, who
visited me seven nights ago, and promised to come again in eight days
time, which will be to-morrow, will soon quiet the fighting. He is also
in quest of a magician called Bright Robe.

The stranger glanced furtively at his imaginative host; but in the
face of Little Heron there was nothing to be read but simplicity and
contentment.

I have heard of that great magician, Wise-as-a-she-wolf, and shall
remain with you, if you will keep me, to enjoy the honour of seeing
him, replied Bright Robe. But his appetite was gone, and he ate
very little of the snipe. In spite of his power of dissembling, he
showed considerable uneasiness during the afternoon; and Little Heron
was quick to note it. When the men gathered together, in the evening,
to tell stories of past adventures, Bright Robe had little to say.
Pleading weariness, he retired early to a lodge courteously placed at
his disposal by the chief. In the morning, much to the wonder of the
villagers, the lodge was empty. But when they ran to Little Heron with
the news, that great chief smiled knowingly.

The stranger was Bright Robe, the evil magician, he said, calmly. I
knew him; so I had to warn him to pass on.

Bright Robe flew from the village in the secluded valley as soon as
every one had retired and the lodges were quiet, and raced westward
at his best speed. The island of his birth was no place for him while
Wise-as-a-she-wolf was stirring about. He knew that another meeting
with his powerful rival could mean nothing but five seasons more of
undignified retirement for him, to say nothing of the painful wounds
which he would be sure to receive before he was reduced to submission.
Without his silver robe, he knew that he could not hide for long from
the keen-eyed, invisible Wise-as-a-she-wolf. So he flew westward across
the darkness, determined to remain in the far places of the earth until
he had acquired sufficient strength to return and overthrow his rival.
He crossed the Narrow Sea, and before dawn was at the edge of a village
of the mountaineers.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE DIPLOMACY OF BRIGHT ROBE


Bright Robe was well aware that, until his power should be as great
as his rivals, or the quest of the red feathers should be forgotten,
he must practise every precaution to avoid attracting that magicians
attention afresh, must move artfully, and play a part in life for
which, by nature, he was but ill-suited. His old, arrogant tactics
must be forsworn, or at least amended, for with Wise-as-a-she-wolf on
his trail he must needs have a following of loyal men who would give
no information concerning him. He knew that his enemy would seek him
everywhere; so he sat down in the woods, at the edge of the village of
mountaineers, and devoted several hours to thought. He decided that
the mountaineers, a strong, clannish nation, should be honoured by his
patronage and used like tools, to his purpose. He had never had much
to do with these people, and if they knew anything of his true nature,
it was only by hearsay. He would use all his magic to the advancement
of their prosperity, even as his enemy did for the islanders. And
he dreamed that the time was not far off (as time is calculated by
magicians) when he should use these mountaineers as a weapon against
his enemy.

He did not appear immediately to the people whom he had chosen to
shape to the fulfilment of his plans, but waited until nightfall, and
then flew northward, hundreds of miles beyond the knowledge of the
mountaineers, and descended upon a village of the fat folk who eat raw
flesh. He increased his stature to seven times that of the human body,
and thus struck terror into the hearts of the blubber-eaters. They
offered him their wealth of ivory and furs if he would but leave them
in peace.

My name is Bright Robe, said he, in reply to their abject cries. I
do not want your ivory or walrus tusks, nor yet all your furs. But
bring me your best robes, for I am going to my great lodge of ice,
seven suns journey to the northward, where the cold is so sharp that
no animal can live save the great white wolves.

From their stores he selected a score of robes of the finest black
fox-skins, and a few great pelts of musk-ox, and white bear. Then,
having the furs which he had chosen placed in a heap, he reduced
them to within a portable compass with his magic, lifted them to the
hollow of his arm, and sprang into the air. He flew due north; and
the blubber-eaters stared after him, in silence and sorrow, until he
vanished from their sight.

Beyond the range of vision of the blubber-eaters, Bright Robe altered
his course. This talk of his lodge of ice, and this northward flight,
were but moves in his new game. By sunrise of the next morning he was
in the largest village of the mountaineers, standing before the tent
of the head-chief. This chief was no other than Black Eagle, from whom
Wise-as-a-she-wolf had once asked for information concerning the flight
of Spotted Seal, the warrior who had stolen the red feathers from the
lodge of Run-all-day. The dogs advanced upon Bright Robe even as they
had upon his rival, on a former occasion; but they soon fell back, and
slunk away, before the glance of his eyes. He threw the little bundle,
which he had brought from the north, to the ground in front of Black
Eagles lodge. He passed his hand above it, and muttered a few swift
words, and there lay the twenty robes of fox skin and the other pelts.
Then he called upon the chief, by name.

Black Eagle looked cautiously from his lodge, and stared in wonder at
the stranger and the great pile of furs.

I am Bright Robe, said the magician, and behold I have brought you a
gift of great price, to show my friendship for you and your people.

At that, Black Eagle eyed him suspiciously.

Why do you make me such a gift? he asked. I have done you no
service. What is it you want of me? For I know that it is not for
nothing that you lay all these skins of the black fox in front of my
door.

I shall be honest with you, chief, replied Bright Robe. I could not
deceive so shrewd a man as you, even if it were in my heart to do so. I
bring you this gift of furs, all stitched into broad robes, and shall
make you other gifts, hoping that you will do me a favour. Let me enter
your lodge and talk with you, and you will be glad of my coming.

That may be as it proves, replied Black Eagle, drily. The proof of
the good hunt is in the cooking-pot. The best magician who honoured me
with a visit, nearly broke the head of one of my strongest warriors.
And he--he was known, far and wide, as a gentle magician.

And what was his name? inquired Bright Robe.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf, replied the chief. He noted the look of surprise
on the others face, and added the information that the warrior had
angered the magician by hurling a spear at him. But by then Bright Robe
was shaking his head mournfully.

He is bloodthirsty at heart, he said. I have known it for a long
time. But let me into your lodge, chief, for I have a long story to
tell you.

Black Eagle hesitated, and eyed his visitor uneasily, for he did not
relish the thought of a private interview with him.

My chiefs will be offended if they are not called to hear your talk.
They are like children, in such matters, he said.

You do not trust me, said Bright Robe, sadly. But I trust you, he
added, so you may call your leading warriors to hear what I have to
say.

Black Eagle lost no time in summoning the more important men of the
village to his lodge. They gathered swiftly, armed with spears and
clubs and looking even more savage than their dogs.

Bright Robe, pretending to be quite unnerved by the sight of their
weapons, pointed to the heap of furs, and then, very modestly, told
the story of his fear of Wise-as-a-she-wolf, and of his wish to take
shelter with the strong warriors of the mountains. He explained
that he did not ask them to defend him with their weapons, or run
any risk on his behalf, but only to hide all knowledge of him from
Wise-as-a-she-wolf, or any stranger; and in return for this service
he promised to supply their chief village with all the food and fur
required by its people.

The mountaineers considered the matter with wise and lengthy
deliberation. They examined the furs which lay before the lodge, and
questioned the magician as to where he had obtained them. He told them
how he had robbed the blubber-eaters, miles and miles to the northward,
only a few hours before.

I tell you the truth because I trust you, because you are my friends,
he said. But the day will surely come, and perhaps it will be very
soon, when Wise-as-a-she-wolf will see these skins and ask you the
same question which you have asked me. Then you must say that they are
of your own killing.

But he would not believe us, said Black Eagle, for the great white
bear and the musk-ox are not of this country. In the old days we
sometimes obtained such skins, in small numbers, from the fat people.
But now we have no dealings with them. And Wise-as-a-she-wolf knows all
these things as I know the taste of deer-meat.

Say you so, cried Bright Robe. Then behold, they are all the skins
of little foxes. And so they were, in the flash of an eye.

We hear you, and we see, said an old warrior. The ears of
questioners shall be filled with lies, according to your wish. But why
do you fear this other magician, you who are such a great magic-maker,
and can travel so fast and so far? Could you not change him into a fox
skin, as you have just done to these pelts of bear and musk-ox?

He is stronger than I, and his speed is even greater than mine. Also,
he can make himself invisible as the wind, replied Bright Robe,
truthfully.

We know that. He did it before our eyes, said Black Eagle. And all
the others nodded their heads in agreement. At last it was decided
that Bright Robe should be given a home in the tribe, and such
protection as lies and pretended ignorance could furnish, in return for
a generous supply of food and furs. They led him up the mountain-side,
and showed him a cave, the mouth of which was hidden by climbing
bushes. The magician examined it, and thankfully accepted it as his
home, until such time as he should be in a position to choose a better.
The chief was about to order a man to bring robes and food to the cave,
but the magician laughed and shook his head.

I mean to fly abroad to-night, to gather six days food for the
village, so I shall furnish this place at the same time, he explained.
Now I must rest, he added, anxious to get the warriors away from the
mouth of the cave; for a chilling fear that his great enemy might be
somewhere near, alert to note anything unusual, was on his heart. So
Black Eagle returned to the village with his followers, and Bright Robe
crawled deep into his cave and began a minute examination of it. He was
not entirely satisfied with the result of the investigation, for the
cave was nothing but a tunnel, nowhere of more than half the height
of a man, and of a width scarcely more generous. It sloped gently
downward, and ended in a natural wall of the mountains rib.

A very fine trap, remarked the magician, and I am playing
too unproved a part to risk living in a trap. There might be
disagreements, he continued. Then a good fire at the mouth of the
cave would make it very uncomfortable, even for me--if I happened to be
at home.

He found bones scattered about, and decided that many wolves had denned
there in the past. He lay down on his back, placed his feet against
the end of the tunnel, and anchored himself to the rocky sides, by
the grip of his hands. Then, with a word, his strength was increased
twenty-fold, though his stature remained normal. He thrust tentatively
with his feet. He pushed harder; and harder yet; and at the third
effort he felt the rock shift a little. At that, he rested from his
work long enough to test the roof and walls, to make sure that they,
also, were not giving way. Lying flat again, he applied his feet to
what he now knew to be an unattached mass of rock, and pushed slowly
but steadily, and a shower of earth and small stones rattled down upon
his feet and legs. He drew himself forward, took a fresh grip with
his hands on the sides of the tunnel, and unbent all his strength in
a last, sudden thrust. Outward flew the mass of earth-bound rock,
bigger than the lodge of Black Eagle, and rolled downward for a short
distance, leaving behind it a jagged hole through which entered a glow
of shaded daylight.

Bright Robe cleared the earth from his person and looked cautiously
out from the hole which he had just kicked in the mountain. Already
his magic strength had faded out of his muscles and bones, for he had
not the power to command it for long at a time. He saw before him a
deep, narrow valley of the mountains, and steep, wooded slopes rising
on all sides. A few yards below him lay the great mass of rock which he
had dislodged from its resting-place of centuries. No living thing was
in sight, except a hawk perched in a tree-top half-way up the western
slope of the valley. Black Eagles village lay to the eastward, on the
other side of the ridge through which Bright Robe had crawled, by way
of the cave. The magician viewed the result of his labour with grim
satisfaction.

I like a lodge with two doorways, he said. But it is as well that
my friends should have a knowledge of one only.

He saw that the rock which he had rolled into the valley might attract
attention of any chance wanderer on the mountain sides, or, worse
still, of any one flying in the air. Fresh earth still clung to it,
in patches, and it had cut a deep gash in the moss and soil of the
valley. It was altogether too evident for his liking. So he crawled
from the back-door of the cave, worked such magic on the great boulder
as to reduce it to the dimensions of a pebble, and hurled it over the
western wall. Then he repaired the damages suffered by the moss and
young trees, bent a few spruces from their places so that they hid the
unnatural hole in the mountain, and retired.

Bright Robe spent the early part of the night in spying upon his
allies. He lay hidden in a clump of bushes close to their evening fire,
and listened to their talk; but, though he heard many things that
made his ears tingle, they were planning no treachery against him.
At last he crawled away, and flew westward and northward, beyond the
giants country, and robbed a camp of fishermen of all the fruits of
their toil. He found some pemmican and a few furs, which he kept for
himself. When the mountaineers awoke next morning and discovered the
great store of fish, they were well pleased with the bargain they had
made.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE QUEST


Having restored peace to his beloved islanders, Wise-as-a-she-wolf
allowed Featherfoot to return to his father, and devoted himself to the
search for the red feathers. He questioned every inhabitant of every
village in the island, and beat every grove for his cunning enemy. He
investigated the mountains and the rocky coasts, and scanned every
foot of the barrens; but not a sign of Bright Robe rewarded him. But
from Little Heron, he learned of the fugitives visit to the secluded
valley, and of his furtive departure in the night. Assured that he
was no longer in the island, he crossed the Narrow Sea, and repeated
the question which he had put to Black Eagle once before, when on the
trail of Spotted Seal. And Black Eagle made the same answer. I saw a
man flying over the mountains, ten days ago, toward the land of the
giants, he said. Have you not yet caught the warrior who stole the
magic feathers? he asked.

But the good magician had no time to spend in replying to foolish and
impertinent questions. In a second he was high above the village again,
speeding toward the black places where the giants lived their sullen
and stupid lives. He found Stone Hand squatting before the entrance
of his mound-like lodge, and questioned him from a distance. But it
happened that the chief of the giants was in even a worse temper than
usual, for he had but just eaten too largely of bear meat that was not
very fresh.

Who asks me questions, he cried, disturbing me when I am in pain?
Show yourself, whoever you are.

The good magician showed himself at a safe distance from the
disgruntled giant. I am Wise-as-a-she-wolf, he said, and again asked
if anything had been seen of Bright Robe, or of a man flying in the air.

I know nothing of such things, save that Crack Bone once thought he
could fly like a little bird, growled the giant. And it did him no
good, he added, with a grunt of laughter.

The magician could read nothing in that hairy, dirty, lowering face.
The skull was too thick to allow the workings of the little brain to
affect the glassy eyes. But his suspicions were aroused. You are
encased in stupidity like a seal in blubber, said he, and vanished
from the giants indifferent sight. But he did not go away. For three
days he continued in the vicinity of the giants village, listened
to their infrequent talk without learning anything, and examined
at one time or another, the interior of every lodge. This led to
nothing, however, and he was forced to confess to himself that he had
mistaken the giants stupidity and ill-temper for an intelligent and
preconceived attempt to evade his questions.

So he left the giants and travelled northward. In the Land of Little
Sticks he searched the camps of lonely hunters, but found no trace of
Bright Robe. Passing on, he reached the land of the blubber-eaters,
where the streams and lakes were already frozen. At last he happened
upon the village which his enemy had so recently visited, and from
which he had taken the furs. On learning what these people had to tell
him, he set out for the land of eternal winter, and for Bright Robes
lodge of ice.

For the time of two days and nights (though the sky changed not)
Wise-as-a-she-wolf ran straight on the frozen air, between the white
fields and the ruddy north-lights. He was clothed in many garments of
fur, for well did he know the cold of those regions, where only the
great white wolves, that are the care of the northern gods, can live.
He had brought food, and he ate as he ran. The north-lights shook and
clashed before him and above him, blew like flame to right and left
and came crackling back again. He heard the hunting-cries of the white
wolves, as they ran on a mad, age-old trail, the scent of which was
nowhere but in their own blind souls. And when they passed beneath him,
white as frost and death, he sprang upward between the curtains of the
north-lights.

[Illustration: THEY PASSED BENEATH HIM, WHITE AS FROST AND DEATH.]

He came to the wall of ice, beyond which live the four gods of the
north; and yet he had seen nothing of Bright Robe or his lodge. He did
not cross the wall, for he felt that his enemy was in no position to
court the attention of the gods; and the cold gnawed him, and was like
the hand of death against his heart, so he turned and sped southward.
Again he hunted through the lands of the little fat men with smoky
faces, and among the lonely hunters, and westward even to the tribes
who wear crests of feathers that hang down their backs as far as
their belts, and whose numbers are as a thousand times the numbers of
the islanders. Then his suspicions of the giants awoke again, and he
returned to their country and watched them narrowly. For three days he
studied them, and though he learned much of their savage natures and
huge appetites, he saw no signs of Bright Robe and nothing to indicate
that they knew anything of that vanished magician.

Again Wise-as-a-she-wolf visited Black Eagle; and now he sat in the
big lodge, and had the warriors brought together, to hear his talk.
And while he sat among the great men of the tribe, a lad stole up to
the cave and warned Bright Robe that his enemy was in the village. So
Bright Robe, from well within the cave, lightened a great rock that
lay without with his magic, and then told the lad to place it in the
entrance, so that the cave would be hidden. The boy did as he was
told, and lifted the great stone into the mouth of the cave, much to
his own amazement. Then he went back to the village, thinking himself
a great magician. From within, Bright Robe returned its weight to the
stone, and it filled the mouth of the cave as if it were a part of the
everlasting foundation of the mountain. Then he retired by the back
way, flew over the western cliff, and hid himself among tumbled granite
boulders and clumps of spruce-tuck.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf, seated at his ease in the chiefs lodge, with the
savage warriors around him, took note of many things.

Those are fine robes of fox-skins, said he, with his glance on one of
the articles of the fugitive magicians gift.

My people are great hunters, replied Black Eagle, calmly.

And how is it that you are not hunting to-day? he asked, having seen
all the warriors lolling about the village.

The mighty Wise One is interested in his humble servants, remarked
Black Eagle, staring haughtily at his unwelcome visitor.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf nodded, and met the others gaze with severe eyes.

Then it will grieve the Wise One to hear that our storehouses are well
supplied with food of other peoples killing and curing, said the
chief. The good magician is a lover of peace; but we are fighting-men.
And we make war when we please, and when the hunting is poor we take
what we want from lesser tribes.

He spoke threateningly, and all his warriors glared at the quiet
youth in their midst, and laid their hands on their weapons. But
Wise-as-a-she-wolf lost nothing of his habitual composure.

As you are not of my people, he said, it is no affair of mine how
you fight, or how you fill your storehouses, so long as you do not slay
or rob the clans of the island. In this matter of answering harmless
questions, however, I must beg you to assume a gentler manner. Though I
am a hater of bloodshed and quick to forgive injury, yet I am sometimes
moved to sudden wrath.

My manners were never of the best, great chief, replied Black Eagle,
cowed by the others hinted threat. I am sorry that you are displeased
with me and my people, for I am ignorant of neither your power nor
virtue.

You speak fairly, replied the good magician; and I ask no more of
the chief of a savage and deceitful race. I have given my lifes work
to my own people, and still the blood-thirst and greed are strong
in many of their hearts. I could do nothing inside the space of an
hundred seasons to mend your ways save by slaying you, and I am not a
god, to judge if you are worthy to live or not.

You speak rashly, even for a mighty magician, said one of the
warriors. Here we sit around you, with our hands on our weapons, and
yet you insult us at your pleasure.

I fear your weapons no more than twigs in the hands of children,
replied Wise-as-a-she-wolf, calmly. But throw a club, or draw a knife,
and your doom is upon you.

The warriors glanced at one another, impressed by their visitors
manner and voice, and yet doubtful of the truth of his words. Magic was
a great thing, but muscles and clubs and weight of numbers were also
great things. Black Eagle looked at them, and shook his head.

He speaks the truth, he murmured. Then, turning to the magician,
What do you want of us, great chief? he asked.

I want you to tell me if you have seen anything of Bright Robe, who
runs upon the air, said Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

We saw the figure of a warrior flying northward, many days ago, as I
told you before, replied the chief. Did you hear nothing of him,
among the blubber-eaters?

I heard of him from a village which he robbed, answered the magician.

Then he arose, passed out of the lodge, and vanished in the sunlight.




CHAPTER XXIX

PEACE


The brief but sanguinary uprising of the clans was followed by nine
years of peace. Featherfoot spent a great deal of his time with his
own people, and the rest of it in Wise-as-a-she-wolfs service. He
travelled about the island, visiting the camps and villages, watchful
for any signs of uneasiness among the people. He continued to grow,
both mentally and physically, as he had begun in the magic lodge; and
though he was still without the red feathers, he had the silver robe
which had once belonged to the evil magician, which his master had
given him. He was of a kind and merry disposition, and wonderfully
modest for one so young and yet so powerful. The good magician had
purged him of the selfish vanity of youth, without despoiling him of
anything of the glory, romance, and faith of that brave season. So
his wisdom sat easily upon him, and he made friends at every fire.
He perfected himself in wood-craft and all manly sports, entering
in friendly contest in the same, with the young men, on an equal
footing with them; for he considered his magic a thing to use only on
needful occasions, and not to display boastfully in the eyes of his
friends. His natural strength, and size of limb and bone, were already
equal to those of a hardened and well-grown youth of sixteen years.
He was a great story-teller, a weaver of narratives that held his
listeners entranced; and he had learned a great deal of the masters
skill in painting, and could mix pigments as bright as sunshine. With
these pigments he drew the portraits of his friends, and pictures of
their deeds in the chase, on the dressed skins of caribou and seal.
His pleasant fame grew throughout the island until it came near to
rivalling that of the good magician, Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

During the nine years that followed the fighting among the clans,
Run-all-day grew steadily in power, thanks to his honesty and
energy, his wifes sane counsel, and the especial friendship of
Wise-as-a-she-wolf. People gathered to him from the smaller villages,
and strong chiefs and warriors took service with him, until his clan
was the largest and strongest in the island. His people were soon so
numerous that he had to establish a dozen villages, scattered over
a great region; and these villages were strongly situated, and each
commanded by a chief whom he trusted. He made laws, by which thieves
and murderers were to be dealt with, and these were proclaimed in every
village of his clan, after they had received the sanction of the good
magician. The chief of each village was judge of petty offences among
his own people; and if one man stole from another, the chief saw that
he either made good the amount of the theft by double its value, either
in skins, provisions, or service, or left the village in disgrace. In
cases of murder, Run-all-day delivered judgment, after hearing what the
prisoner, and every one else concerned, had to say. There had been laws
before, in the history of the island; but never before the same laws in
force over so large a territory, nor half the conscientiousness shown
in their observance.

There were many who objected to this new order of things, maintaining
that every warrior had a right to settle his private affairs (even if
they included the braining of a fellow-villager or the stealing of
a few robes) without the interference of the chiefs. It was for the
injured parties themselves to retaliate, in the second case, and for
their relatives, in the first, they said. What business the village
chiefs, and Run-all-day, had to thrust their hands in such small
matters they could not see, at least for some time. But after a few of
these exponents of the Rights of Man had suffered death for slaying
people against whom they nursed private grudges, the complaints ceased,
and the laws were respected.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf during this time was much abroad, searching the far
places of the earth for his old enemy. Sometimes he felt that he was
close upon the flying heels of his quarry; for Bright Robe had made a
long journey southward, travelling always under cover of darkness, and
had proclaimed himself among many foreign people. Then he had returned
to his friends the mountaineers, and continued quietly about his
affairs.

The very nearness of Black Eagles village to Wise-as-a-she-wolfs
own country was in its favour as a hiding-place. And now he did less
plundering than of old, in spite of the complaints of the mountaineers,
for he wanted the tales of his depredations to fade from mens talk.
When he did hunt, it was always far a-field, distant many nights
flight from Black Eagles village. And thus, by taking toll of the
distant tribes, flashing his name here and there in far countries, and
letting the nearer people rest in peace and security, he set false
trails for his enemy to follow. His longest journey had extended even
to the sea islands where it is always summer, and where tribes of
strange little people, with long tails and furred bodies, and the faces
of old men, chatter in the tree-tops. There, also, are men of duskier
complexions than the blubber-eaters, and hair as straight and black as
the mountaineers, who shape canoes out of great tree-trunks and make
voyages of several days duration between island and island. To these
people he showed his magic, and told his name and a fine tale of how he
intended to build a great lodge in some southern forest; and then he
returned, under cover of night, to his cave above Black Eagles village.

While the silent struggle of cunning went on between the two magicians,
with the whole world for their battleground, and in the ninth summer
of peace among the islanders, young Featherfoot came to the village
of Little Heron, in the secluded valley. When he told his name, he
was welcomed as a great chief, for his fame had travelled before him.
Little Heron led him to his own lodge, set the best of food before
him, and afterward begged him to tell one of his delightful stories. So
the youth told the story of the Crimson Wigwam, as he had heard it in
his own heart, and it sang with the adventures and happy emotions of
a young warrior and a maiden. As he talked, he felt the grave, bright
eyes of Star Flower, the chiefs daughter, upon him, and his glance met
hers, and lo, they both looked downward and the trend of Featherfoots
narrative wavered for the space of a heart-beat.

The tale was well received by the chief and his wife and his old
mother. Star Flower alone of the company did not lift her voice in
praise; but her eyes again met those of the young chief, and were
hidden again as swiftly by the dark lashes. After the evening meal, the
entire village gathered about a great fire, and Featherfoot told the
stories of the Wallet of Plenty, and the Magic of the Red Arrow; and
though he was but vaguely conscious of the acclamations of the hunters,
his eyes glanced frequently, yet furtively, toward Star Flower, reading
the shy signs of her approval with inward delight.

Featherfoot spent ten days in the village of Little Heron, and told
stories, and painted wonderful pictures, and dreamed a glorious dream
in his heart. Star Flower told him the magic of the whistle that had
been given her by old Whispering Grass; how Wise-as-a-she-wolf had
given it to the medicine-maker, and how its possessor, if in peril, had
but to sound a note on it and the good magician would hear, though he
were at the worlds end, and would hasten to the rescue.

I, too, would hear the sound, if you were in danger, replied the
youth.

He knew this was so, for his heart said it and his heart was never
mistaken; but he believed that it was so because of his love for the
girl, and that it had nothing to do with the magic he had been taught
by Wise-as-a-she-wolf. He told her how old Whispering Grass had saved
his life with her medicines, when he was a very little baby; and how
his father, Run-all-day, had made the journey to the old womans lodge
and home again on the red feathers,--all of which he had heard from his
mother. In return, she told him of her childhood; and the old people
were quick to remark all this whispering, and meeting and beaming of
eyes, and nodded their heads wisely at one another. On the tenth day
after his arrival, Featherfoot left the village, to continue the work
that the master had given him to do.

I shall return, when I have proved myself a strong warrior, he said
to Little Heron.

But to Star Flower he whispered that he would return before the coming
of another summer, whether men called him a strong warrior or no.
And she blushed, and replied that indeed it would matter little what
men said of him who was already the greatest chief, and warrior, and
magician in the world.

The summer waned, and again the berries ripened on the barrens, the
birds took wing and the caribou moved to sheltered pastures; and
Wise-as-a-she-wolf, in whose heart a restless aching for new sights
and adventures was ever present, left the island again and flew on the
long trails of the plover and snipe and honking geese. He had no fear
for Featherfoots safety or for the welfare of the people in general,
for he knew that Run-all-days clans would maintain order while he was
away, and he did not think that Bright Robe was within thousands of
miles of his native place. In truth, he was beginning to hope that his
enemy had either given up all thought of revenge, or suffered some new
reverse of fortune. And yet, if such were the case, what had become
of the red feathers? Perhaps he had met and been vanquished by some
foreign magician. If so, the feathers should be easily found, for
the new owner would make use of them openly; and if he were not too
strong--but the good magician would follow the vague suppositions no
further. The world held what he desired to know, and he was keen to
read; and when the secret was disclosed would be the time to act.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf visited the islands of the southern seas, where
frosts and seasons of unfruitlessness are unknown, and there, for
the second time, found the false trail of Bright Robe. He journeyed
westward and southward, into a land of vast and tangled forests. In
those dark and stagnant places, lit only by the blooms of poisoned
vines, and inscrutable as the heart of a god, a fugitive might well
find a secret dwelling. So thought the good magician; and after a days
flight above those millions and millions of crowded tree-tops, he felt
that here, if anywhere, was his enemy hidden. He descended through the
roof of vivid, tangled green, and looked about him, somewhat daunted at
the gloom, the netted vegetation on all sides, and the strange noises
overhead. A thousand thieves might hide securely for a thousand years
in this jungle, he exclaimed, and felt a pang of hopelessness. He
stood motionless for a little while, staring about him. Then, drawing
his axe of magic workmanship, he began to cut his way through the vines
and creepers and smaller growth that surrounded him. Intent on his
labour, he relaxed that effort of will by which he made and maintained
his invisibility. He struck lustily, to right and left, advancing
steadily after every stroke. Already he felt in better spirits,
reflecting that here would be found some great, new things to learn and
unfamiliar aspects of truth, even if Bright Robe should continue to
slip through his fingers. The fire of the explorer burned within him.

For never before, in all his wanderings, had he descended into these
forests. He would pierce to the heart of this vivid, inscrutable
country, and lay bare all its secrets.




CHAPTER XXX

THE POISONED DART


He felt a sudden pang, as of the touch of flame, in his arm. He reeled
backward, and at a glance discovered a tiny arrow of strange form,
and no longer than a mans finger, embedded in the muscles below his
shoulder. He plucked it out; and in the same instant of time made
himself invisible. Already a horrible madness was upon him, tearing at
limbs, and brain, and heart. The walls of living green billowed and
span around him.

I am struck by magic, he cried; but I, too, am a magician.

His voice sounded like the voice of a stranger. He saw grinning faces
on every side--green, grinning masks that mouthed and vanished and
returned. He sprang at them, striking with his magic axe, wrenching
them apart with hands that contained the strength of giants and the
madness of the poison in his blood. Something strangely familiar
got within his reach, something human of body, and armed with a long
stick, and he snatched it, and broke it, and hurled it away among the
reeling masks of green. Here was another. And here they ran like ants
in a forest of moss, darting this way and that. He leaped upon them in
his madness, and crushed them. Again the faces swayed in upon him, and
he tore at them with all the strength of his magic and the blindness
of his agony. He beat them back. He tore them, and struck them down.
Then he turned and ran through a tide of leaping, bubbling green that
washed about him, and over him, with a pleasant music of waves. And so
he drowned, and yet resolved to fight on. And he looked up through the
fathoms of green tide and had not the strength, nor the thought, to
close his eyelids. But his brave spirit, armed with all the magic he
had ever known, fought on, unbidden, to save the quiet body against the
poison of the dart.

Of a sudden, after what may have been an age of death or only a night
of sleep, he sobbed his lungs full of air again like one who wins to
the surface of the water after a long dive. The blackness that had
weighed upon him rolled away; and behold, the green tide was gone, and
he saw the open sky and felt a ruffling of wind on his face. I have
tasted death, he murmured, and found it bitter in my soul, for all my
power of magic.

He moved a little, turning on his left side, and his body was full of
darting pain. The dew of sweat broke out on him, streaming on brow and
limbs and breast. He saw that he had struggled from the jungle and now
lay on a grassy hummock; but on all sides stood the hideous, green
forest, as if waiting to engulf him again. He glanced at his right
arm, and saw a tiny ring of purple, hot and puckered, on the sunburned
skin. Then he knew that it was poison, and not magic, that had leaped
upon him, and filled him with madness and the pangs of death. Yet is
not poison a kind of magic, after all, compounded by the gods of hate,
in the beginning of the world, such hidden death as Bright Robe would
make, if he were wise enough?

Wise-as-a-she-wolf touched the grass near him in a dozen places, with
his left hand, starting a dozen little fires that weaved a tent of
smoke for protection from the sun. He took a leather bottle from his
belt and drank his fill of cool water; and no sooner had he withdrawn
the vessel from his lips than it was full again. But as he did not
possess the Wallet of Plenty, he drew his magic hunger-belt tight.
So he lay until night, with the little fires burning around him, yet
consuming nothing, and the smoke of them shutting him in as with walls
and roof. Strange and terrible sounds rang from the forest, but he gave
small heed to them, knowing that neither weapon nor living body could
pass the thin boundaries of his circle of fires. His body ached and his
brain felt like a withered leaf in his skull. At last he sank into a
troubled sleep. Again the green faces mouthed at him; and he struggled
with sleep--or was it death?--and threw the monster off. After that he
lay awake until sunrise, drinking frequently of the cool water.

When the sun came up, throwing level shafts of gold across the walls of
the forest, a cool wind arose with it, bending the frailer tree-tops
and washing the stagnant night from where he lay. There was a tang of
salt in the wind, and the good magician breathed it with thankfulness.
I must get down to the sea, he murmured, and wash in the strong,
salt waters, and forget these tides of poisoned leaves. But when he
tried to raise himself on his elbow, the pain of every bone and muscle
was so keen that he had to sink flat again. All that day, and for
two days afterward, he fasted. But he drank the water from the magic
bottle, without denying his thirst, and felt the poison weakening. On
the fourth morning he stood upright and sniffed the wind that swooped
and baffled over the eastern wall of the forest. Though his head span
dizzily, and horrible pains gripped him, he fastened the magic bottle
to his belt, took up his weapons, and jumped feebly into the air. He
arose like a wounded bird, struggled crookedly and at last topped the
barrier of living, threatening green. In front, beyond miles of jungle,
he saw a thin line of crested, wind-bent palms, and further out, the
haze and glint of the sea. The clean, salt wind blew against him, and
he set his feet upon it and staggered forward. Sometimes he dropped so
low that his moccasins touched the massed foliage of the forest, that
seemed to look upward, with smeared, uncertain faces, waiting for him;
but he arose again and again, with desperate efforts, and held on his
course. At last he won to the fringe of palms, and fell to the white
sand beside the crystal lip of the tide.

The good magician dwelt in the shade of the wind-bent palms for many
days, at first lying inactive, but soon going down to the water each
morning and evening to bathe. It was not a great while before he was
strong enough to kill a few of the fish that swam in those clear
waters, using one of his magic arrows for a spear. Between the beach
of white sand and the outer sea-ways, lay a still lagoon, fenced by a
reef that stood gleaming in the sun at the time of low water, and broke
white and green with surf when the tide was high. In this sheltered
water Wise-as-a-she-wolf bathed without fear of treacherous currents
and prowling monsters of the deep. Day by day the poison left him, the
pains became milder and less frequent in their attacks, and muscle and
flesh regained a little of their old strength.

It is midwinter in my island now, and Featherfoot is telling stories
at his fathers fire, and my lodge is empty, said the good magician,
one morning. His heart was sore with homesickness; and his eyes were
weary of the everlasting sunshine, the white surf and the green water;
his ears were tired of the continual rattling of the wind in the harsh
leaves of the palms and his body was tired of its feebleness. Far to
seaward, like a shadow of cloud on the horizon, lay an island, and
he resolved to fly to it, as soon as the heat of the day was spent,
thereby to test his strength. By this time his head was steady, and he
could use all the joints of his body without more pain than a man would
wince at. Also, he could walk quite briskly, for a short distance,
without the aid of the magic moccasins.

When the sun was touching the westward forests, Wise-as-a-she-wolf
tightened the thongs of the moccasins of the wind, ran forward for a
few steps and sprang into the air. He crossed the lagoon, and the naked
reef where the crabs scuttled heavily in the red light, and rose a
little when he saw the outer waters heaving beneath him.

It is a long flight, he said. I must save my strength. And so he
ran cautiously, measuring every well-considered stride. Sometimes he
touched the smooth back of a billow, and not until then would he put
forth fresh effort and rise a few yards in the air. He flew visibly, so
as to have all his mind and energy in the flight. The island grew on
the darkling sea-rim. He glanced backward and saw the long coast of the
mainland flat under the red sky. Beneath him swam a great shark, like
a shadow in the deep. He looked down on the dim shape of the fish, and
knew why it cruised there, patient yet expectant.

It is but a short flight after all, he said, and laughed a little
to feel so much of the old strength in his heart and legs. So he ran
faster, and saw that the wavering shape below also gathered speed. We
are all hunters or hunted, he mused. The shark follows me, because
of the poor flesh on my bones; and I follow Bright Robe because of the
red feathers on his feet. Yes, and because he has injured my people
and struck at my power. But if it were not for the feathers, I think I
should forsake this dreary quest.

He reached the island safely, just at the fall of the sudden night.
Here, too, he found a white beach, the sand of which was still
pleasantly warm from the day-long heat of the sun. He was tired, so lit
his circle of magic fires immediately, and lay down. For three nights
he dreamed that his people needed him. It is foolishness, he assured
himself. What can they want of me, now that they are at peace with
each other, and ruled by wise heads and strong hands? The poison is
filling my brain with ugly dreams, in its last efforts to injure me.
And on the second morning he told himself the same thing; but on the
third, his argument rang falsely to his heart. He went down to the
sea, just at the rising of the sun, and splashed about in the crystal
water; but he could not clear his mind of his dream. He fished, cooked,
and ate his breakfast, and retired into his tent of smoke; but still
the dream whispered within him. When the heat of the day was spent, he
started northward, over the rocking sea.

Wise-as-a-she-wolfs homeward journey proved to be both slow and
painful. He was forced to rest many times, in many strange lands.




CHAPTER XXXI

THE FREEZING OF THE NARROW SEA


Events had moved swiftly in the great northern island during
Wise-as-a-she-wolfs absence.

As autumn stole over the forests and barrens, ripening, searing, and
slaying, old men predicted a winter of more than usual severity. They
read the signs in the moss, in the flight of certain fowl, in the fur
and intestines of animals. Then came the frost, and gripped the island
in an aching, relentless vise for ten days before the sky thickened to
snow. The snow fell steadily, for two days and two nights; and with
the passing of the frozen clouds came pitiless winds from the north,
sweeping between the blue and the white. The snow, dry as dust, was
blown into long ridges, and beaten to the firmness of packed sand, and
banked high against the lodges of men and the lairs of beasts.

Beyond the Narrow Sea the mountaineers were called together, from their
several villages, by Black Eagle. Bright Robe was summoned from his
hiding-place, and took his seat on the chiefs right hand.

This will be a hungry winter, said the chief. Hunting will be
difficult, for the caribou have travelled far. Bright Robe will not be
able to feed us all, for his heart has so softened of late, that he
will rob no village unless it be distant a three-days journey.

The warriors grunted agreement to the chiefs words, but the magician
held his peace and wondered what was in the others mind.

The Narrow Sea is frozen, continued Black Eagle. A safe way leads
to the island, where the warriors are feeble as old women and the
storehouses are full. We shall march across the frozen water and take
the richness of that old island.

The warriors shouted approval, for they loved easy fighting and full
meals.

I do not advise it, said Bright Robe. Wise-as-a-she-wolf would
scatter and slay you with his magic.

Black Eagle looked at him with an evil smile.

With you on our side, why need we fear the magic of
Wise-as-a-she-wolf? he said. You are the greatest magician in the
world. You are too modest, my friend, and have hidden so long in the
mountains that you have forgotten your strength.

I will not fight the men of the great island, said Bright Robe.

You have the heart of a mouse, returned Black Eagle, with a smile
on his lips, but a gleam of rage in his eyes. If you do not help us
against the people of the island, then shall we sit peacefully here,
while our swiftest runner carries word of you to Wise-as-a-she-wolf.

Unless he is fleeter than the red feathers, he will not run very far,
said Bright Robe, dangerously calm.

The chief glanced at him again. So you have a little courage, after
all, he cried, in feigned amazement. No messenger will be sent, he
added, but when next Wise-as-a-she-wolf comes to the village, he will
be told of how you have made such a fool of him.

Bright Robe moved uneasily, and his sinister eyes flashed over the
company of squatting warriors. They were all armed with bows, clubs,
and spears; but he knew that, by the help of his magic, he could
scatter and slay them at but small risk to himself. What would the
routing of these people avail him, however? Word of the fight would
travel swiftly to the ears of his powerful enemy; and who would then
hide him from that awful meeting with lies and cunning? He realized
that the time was not yet ripe for him to disagree too violently with
Black Eagle and his people.

Let us not talk any longer like enemies and fools, he said. It would
be useless for me to deny my fear of Wise-as-a-she-wolf, for you know
what is in my heart concerning that bloodthirsty magician. But I will
first cross to the island, to spy upon my enemy. It may be that he is
far away, hunting for me at the other end of the earth.

Black Eagle did not answer for a long time. At last he said, A swift
runner can go, and inquire of the villages on the coast as to the
whereabouts of the one you fear. Each way is but a half-days journey
for a seasoned runner.

I think, chief, that the villagers are more likely to kill your
messenger than to answer his questions, replied Bright Robe,
sneeringly.

Black Eagle realized that it was now his turn to practise diplomacy. He
knew that his only hold on the other was that evil magicians fear of
Wise-as-a-she-wolf. He did not think that Bright Robe would desert him,
and all claim on future services, except in an extreme case; and he was
sure that he would not try to make peace with his enemy by carrying
word to him of the intended invasion, for Wise-as-a-she-wolf would not
forget past injuries for so small a favour.

Go, then, said the chief. We will await your return.

It will be dark in a few hours, and then I will go, replied Bright
Robe, with dignity.

When he set out, through the starlight, for the land of his enemy,
his heart was torn with uncertainty as to how he should act in this
unforeseen dilemma which the freezing of the Narrow Sea had forced upon
him. To openly assist the mountaineers against Wise-as-a-she-wolfs own
people, would be madness; to desert the men who had helped him deceive
his enemy for the past nine years would be as fatal in the end. His
only hope lay in the chance that the good magician might be far from
home, in which case he would help the mountaineers, unobtrusively,
until they had fully committed themselves, and then flee under cover of
night. He reflected that, while Wise-as-a-she-wolf was busily engaged
in punishing the men from beyond the Narrow Sea, he would have ample
time to find a new hiding-place, far, far away from the scenes of his
failures. Then he would get rid of the feathers in some way, and live
quietly, relinquishing all hope of future greatness.

When Bright Robe reached the coast of the island, he was still
struggling with the problem. The temptation to turn southward
and continue his flight was almost too strong to resist; but the
thought of how the mountaineers would explain to his enemy all his
nine-year scheme of evasion, making similar practices useless in the
future, daunted him afresh. For a moment his brain turned, in brief
consideration, on surrender. He would seek the just and angry magician
(whose people he had so often despoiled and slain) and give him the
feathers, and confess his sins, and--and? Neither brain nor heart had
courage to answer the unasked question. His enemy was just--and what
was he to gain by surrendering himself to justice?

Bright Robe went dully about his work. He discovered a cluster of
lodges, drifted deep in snow. He approached them, and raised a feeble
voice. I am cold, I am hungry, he cried. I have been lost in a
storm.

A figure crawled from the nearest lodge. Bright Robe staggered forward
and fell. Strong arms lifted him and carried him to warmth and shelter.
He was fed, and soft furs were laid over him, and all the while he
played the part of one brought close to death by cold and exhaustion.
He spent several hours in the lodge, and learned from the honest fellow
whom he questioned that Wise-as-a-she-wolf had not been seen in the
western villages since autumn. After learning this, he pretended to
sleep; but he soon crawled from the lodge, leaving the hospitable,
unsuspecting hunter snoring peacefully. He flew eastward and inland,
now with some assurance of spirit. The night had clouded, though it was
still bitterly cold. He found several villages in the darkness and, by
using the same tactics as before, learned again that the good magician
had not been seen for two moons. Then he faced westward again and ran
at his best speed.




CHAPTER XXXII

THE INVASION OF THE ISLAND


The westward villages made but slight resistance to the mountaineers.
They were taken unawares, scattered blindly and many were slain. Some
of the fugitives hid, and others ran to warn the nearer settlements.
The invaders travelled slowly, in spite of Bright Robes efforts to
hurry them, stopping to rest and feast in every village and encumbering
themselves with booty and prisoners. Their only prisoners were women.
Bright Robe did his share of the fighting, but was careful to make it
no more than a mans share. He fought on the ground, like his fellows,
and though he served as guide to the hidden encampments, he played an
inconspicuous part. And so they raided, fought and feasted for three
days, hearing nothing in all that time of Wise-as-a-she-wolf. The main
body held straight to the eastward, and small companies branched off to
the north and south.

On the fourth day of the invasion the mountaineers reached a large
village of deserted lodges. Even the storehouses were empty. The
disappointment angered them, and they pushed forward with more haste.
For three days they travelled, without finding anything of the
islanders except tracks of their snow-shoes and their empty lodges. By
this time, Bright Robe had decided that he had mixed as deeply in the
invasion as was wise, and that nightfall should be the signal for his
southward flight; for his old enemy, wherever he was wandering, would
surely take a hand in the game before long. But he said no word of this
to Black Eagle.

Let the fool suffer for his foolishness, he muttered.

The mountaineers were careless soldiers, and sent no scouts ahead of
their army. What have we to fear from these men with the hearts of
mice and the muscles of women? sneered Black Eagle. They run before
us, even before they see our spears. In a few days we will drive them
into the great salt water in the east.

Shortly after noon they reached another empty village. They rushed
into the lodges, shouted angrily, and fought among themselves for
what little the departed inhabitants had left behind. The five hundred
warriors crowded into the open space, overturning the lodges, and
reviling the islanders. Arrows leaped from the woods on every side. Two
flights sprang forth and tasted blood before the mountaineers realized
what had happened. Then they rallied and dashed for the hidden enemy.
Black Eagle turned furiously upon Bright Robe.

You have brought us to this trap, he cried, and struck at him with
his club. The blow fell harmlessly on the magicians shield; and in a
second in the crush and tumult of the battle they were separated.

Many of the mountaineers who advanced into the woods, to close with
the surrounding enemy, were swiftly forced back to the clearing. Blood
melted the snow, and contending warriors, with their racquets slipped
or broken from their feet, struggled deep in the drifts, stabbing
blindly. Shouts and cries of dismay rang up to the frozen sky. Men
fought hand to hand, even breast to breast,--yes, and tooth to flesh.
The lodges were torn and overturned, and as more men continued to pour
into the clearing the snow was trampled hard as earth and crusted with
frozen blood.

Bright Robe dared not fly openly from the scene and yet he was eager
to get away, fearing always the arrival of Wise-as-a-she-wolf. At last
he broke from the thick of the fight, hurling friend and foe alike
from his path by means of his magic strength. Many sturdy strokes were
aimed at him, but his magic turned them all aside, and he won to the
shelter of the forest without hurt. It was his intention to run to a
safe distance from the battle, hide until dark, and then take flight.
He ran straight through the woods, beating down the occasional warriors
who tried to bar his way. He had travelled nearly a mile, and was clear
of the outskirts of the battle, when, in pausing for breath, he heard
the springing of parted branches close behind him. He turned with ready
club, but saw nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

I must turn back a little, and look at the fight from the islanders
side of it.

From the fugitives from the western villages word of the invasion
travelled quickly to the ears of Run-all-day. Swift runners were
sent in every direction, to warn the clans of the danger and bid
them prepare to fight. The people of the villages which lay in Black
Eagles course were told to fall back, with all their possessions,
upon Run-all-days country. Then Run-all-day divided his own warriors
and the men who joined him from the other clans, into three bodies of
about four hundred men each. One of these armies, under Jumping Wolf,
was sent forward immediately to encounter the mountaineers on their
probable course. Another was hurried forward in the same direction, but
several miles to the southward. The third was held in readiness near
the villages where the women and children and stores of the fugitives
were sheltered.

Jumping Wolf sent scouts in advance of the little army, to scour the
country for miles. These scouts were not long in finding the invaders,
and for a whole day before the attack the commander was constantly in
receipt of information concerning the approach of the enemy. He did not
rush his men, but advanced at an easy pace, ever on the look-out for a
suitable position in which to stand and strike. When night fell, his
men ate the cooked food that they had brought, dug great trenches in
the snow, and slept without fires. Shortly before noon he arrived at a
large, deserted village, and halted his men. A scout came running to
him.

They are close at hand, he said, and one who guides them is pointing
the way to this village.

So Jumping Wolf placed his eager warriors in the edge of the woods that
surrounded the clearing in which stood the empty lodges.

Now is the time for you to put your magic to good use, he said, to
Featherfoot.

But the youth shook his head. Unless they have a magician among them,
I shall not use my magic, he replied, placing a common arrow on the
string of his bow.

The islanders waited patiently, crouching on their thong-woven
racquets, peering eagerly into the clearing. Their bows were strung and
the arrows were loose in their belts, and their hearts were hot for
the battle. At last the invaders appeared, dashing into the clearing
and among the lodges in noisy disorder; and at the sight a thrill of
joy and rage ran through the waiting islanders. The notches of arrows
met the taut strings; and still the chiefs crouched motionless, giving
no sign. The place fairly squirmed with the shouting, dark-skinned
mountaineers. Jumping Wolf raised his hand above his head; up went the
hands of the other chiefs; out leaped the arrows upon the crowding,
struggling invaders. Again the bows were bent and released; and then
the islanders sprang to meet the rallying mountaineers, and struck with
clubs and spears.

It was soon quite evident to Featherfoot that the Beothics had the
upper hand in the engagement, though the invaders were the more
numerous. So he fell back from the struggle for a moments rest.
In surveying the struggle from a vantage point at the edge of the
clearing, his attention was attracted by a big stranger who fought
for the mountaineers and yet was lighter of skin. He saw this warrior
suddenly make his way out of the thick of the fight, dashing friend and
foe from his way with a strength that was more than human. He saw him
win, unhurt, to the edge of the clearing, and dart from sight among the
trees. He fights with strong magic, and shields himself with magic,
said Featherfoot, and immediately gave chase. As he ran among the
snatching, buffeting branches, he drew his most powerful arrow from his
belt, and pulled the silver robe above his head.

Featherfoot soon came in sight of the stranger. At the sound of
his approach the other turned; but the youth, knowing himself to be
invisible by virtue of the silver robe, halted and unhurriedly set the
magic arrow to the string of the magic bow. So great was the magic of
that arrow, that its weight became as the weight of a small mountain
the moment it hit its mark. There was no pity in Featherfoots heart,
for he had seen the strange magician slay both friend and foe, with
weapons from which they had no chance of escape; so he drew the bow
calmly and loosed the shaft. The stranger fell, staggered to his feet,
struck the arrow from his breast and leaped high above the tree-tops.
There he hung for a little, struggling desperately; but when another
arrow found him he dropped back to earth, turning over and over in
his fall. Featherfoot was upon him as soon as he touched the snow.
Knowing now that the stranger was Bright Robe, he bound the nerveless
limbs with magic thongs that no giant could break. Then, undoing the
moccasins from the unresisting feet, he found the red feathers. Quick
as thinking, they were transferred to his own moccasins, and his
snow-shoes were cast aside.

No sooner were the magic feathers in place against the soles of his
feet, than the shrill note of the whistle which old Whispering
Grass had given to Star Flower sounded faintly but terrifically in
Featherfoots ears. He sprang into the air and ran swiftly in the
direction of Little Herons village, leaving the evil magician bound
and unconscious on the snow.

He caught a blurred glimpse of the battle below, now scattered
and abating in fury, but so dazed and breathless was he with the
frightful speed at which he rushed through the air, his eyes could not
distinguish friend from foe. But whatever the outcome of the battle, he
had heard the whistle and must answer the call. So he ran on, though
his brain reeled, and his eyes ached, and his breath was like ice and
smoke in his throat. Presently, as he became accustomed to the new
manner and rate of travelling, the sensations grew less painful. Soon
he was able to see clearly, and run steadily, and draw his breath with
comparative ease.

Suddenly, as he raced along between the fading sky and the dimming
wastes of the earth, he heard the whispering of flight beside him.
Then he found that the silver robe had slipped from his head, and he
snatched at it with his left hand, to draw it into place.

Hold, cried the voice of Wise-as-a-she-wolf, close at his elbow.

It is I, Featherfoot, cried the youth in answer, desisting from his
efforts to hide himself beneath the robe and at the same time returning
his club to his belt. At that, the good magician appeared close beside,
and threw his arm about his neck.

I had my axe raised to strike you, lad, he whispered. I thought my
old enemy was in my power at last.

I have wounded him and bound him, master, replied Featherfoot,
breathlessly. He lies near Diving Beavers village, where the warriors
are still fighting. But I have heard the call of the whistle, master,
and must hasten to answer it. Star Flower is in need of me.

Go, my son. I, too, have heard the whistle. But now I will hasten
to my warriors, said the good magician. And so they parted, between
the shadowy wilderness and the darkling sky, with no questions of the
months of separation. Wise-as-a-she-wolf turned in the direction of
Diving Beavers encampment, and ran slowly on the icy currents of the
wind. He was still weak with the poison of the little arrow, and felt
the weariness of the long flight which he had just made. He wondered
to feel so little elation of spirit at the knowledge of Bright Robes
capture. His thoughts were all of Featherfoot, who was as dear as a son
to him. Star Flower, Star Flower, he repeated, and smiled pensively.
Whoever this Star Flower is, and however she came to possess the
whistle, I think she will teach the lad a magic of which I have no
mastery, he reflected. He will build a lodge of bark and skins, and
it will be more beautiful to his eyes than my great house in the pine
wood, with its smokeless lamps and magic walls. He is young, and Youth
is the greatest magician. He loves a woman, and that is the strongest
magic. Thus, with mingled tenderness and distress, he considered the
case of Featherfoot as he flew to the succour of his warriors.




CHAPTER XXXIII

THE RESCUE OF STAR FLOWER


The note of the whistle was not repeated; but Featherfoot ran straight
toward the village of Little Heron. The last red light of the short
winter day was fading below the west, when he reached the valley that
he knew and loved so well. He descended among the lodges. All was
quiet. There was no light of cooking-fires, or sound of contented
voices. He glanced at the trampled snow under his feet, and beheld
a war-club with a splintered haft. And there, a step beyond, lay an
arrow, and there a dark stain melted into the snow. With a low cry of
consternation, he ran to the chiefs lodge and peered within. It was
empty, and even the furs were gone from the couches. He started to
run to the next lodge, but the dusk of night was deepening, and his
foot tripped in something and he fell heavily. He recovered himself
quickly, and found that the thing over which he had stumbled was the
lifeless body of Little Heron. Then he knew that it would be useless
to look in the other lodges. He arose on the magic feathers and circled
close about the village. He found the corpses of warriors and old
men and boys, and even of old women. He flew in a wider circle, and
yet a wider, swooping low to every open glade. Here and there lay
the cold bodies, now of a mountaineer, now of a villager whom he had
known, showing how in the unequal struggle they had scattered and how
the fugitives had been overtaken. Still he widened the circle of his
flight. At last, away to the westward, he caught the glint of fire at
the base of a dark hill, and even as he swerved in his course, the
little fire spark leaped to the flame of a comfortable fire. He swooped
nearer, and peered out upon the scene from the cover of the tree-tops.
There were more than a dozen mountaineers, a few busy preparing food at
the newly kindled fire, the others lolling nearby on out-spread furs.
In the background a group of women were huddled, and their half-stifled
sobbing came piteously to his ears. Featherfoot drew his club from his
belt, pulled the hood of the silver robe over his head, and soared
noiselessly from the tree-tops.

Have no fear, Star Flower, he cried, and descended, like a hawk upon
its prey. The first mountaineer to receive a blow of the club fell
across the fire, and lay there. Two more went down, with broken skulls,
before any of them realized the danger. Ten of them reached the cover
of the woods, which proved no protection at all. Six gained a distance
of several hundred yards from the fire, before the invisible death
overtook them. Three won half-way up the hill, but none reached the
top. Then Featherfoot returned to the camping-place, plucked the body
from the fire and threw it into the bushes, loosed the thongs that
bound the women and clasped Star Flower in his arms. She made frantic
efforts to free herself from his embrace, and the other women and girls
screamed and gazed wildly around.

It is I, Featherfoot, whispered the bewildered youth, still holding
her firmly.

I cannot see you, she cried. It is the voice of Featherfoot, but--

The youth dropped his arms from her slender body, tore the silver robe
from his head and shoulders and tossed it on the snow. Then he turned
back to Star Flower, smiling. The other women drew nearer, and ceased
their screaming.

Yes, it is the young chief who drew the beautiful pictures, said one.
It is the great story-teller, said another.

Star Flower stepped close to him, clasped her little hands behind his
neck and hid her face in the furs on his breast.

Oh, I was not sure, she whispered. It was your voice; but I heard
the rushing of winged feet, and saw the savage warriors run and fall
before no visible danger. I thought the good magician had answered the
call of the whistle.

Then Featherfoot laughed softly, and held her close, and in his heart
he pitied his friend and master, the greatest magician in the world.
And as for the good red feathers, he forgot all about them.

Fear nothing, he said, tenderly and joyfully. Your lover answered
the call, and love winged his feet.

Hail, Youth, speaking such truth through very inexactness and the
vagueness of dreams. Hail, Love, who sees so far and so clearly through
glory-blinded eyes.




CHAPTER XXXIV

REST


The good magician found his old enemy bleeding in the snow, and bound
by thongs magic-strengthened, which he was powerless to break in
his weakened condition. Having seen that the enemy was broken and
scattered, and that every mountaineer ran, inspired by no purpose
except the saving of his own life, he lifted Bright Robe in his arms
and carried him into one of the few lodges that remained standing. He
loosened the thongs and poured water between the swollen lips.

What now? asked Bright Robe, with the courage of despair.

For a little while the good magician sat silent, in the darkness, as if
he had not heard.

Though I defeated you before, and loosed you in the wilderness in the
shape of a little owl, he said, at last, yet you outwitted me at the
end of the five years. And though your magic possessed but half its
former strength when you regained your old shape, yet you managed to
hide from me for nine years and have led invaders into my country. Now,
even were I to let you go away without punishment, your strength would
be no more than that of the least of the magicians, for magic is a
thing that weakens under defeat. It is a vanity, failing in adversity,
but growing ever stronger and more vain with success. By it, one may
win fear, and if he uses it for the protection of his people, it brings
him respect and friendship; but the greatest magician cannot win love
by his magic.

Bright Robe lay very still, listening and wondering. I have no fear of
you, continued Wise-as-a-she-wolf, and, seeing you bleeding there,
overthrown in your evil doing by a lad whom I love, I find but little
hate of you in my heart. You must live for ever, in weakness or in
strength, in wickedness or in virtue, even as I, and that is punishment
beyond any mans deserving.

Yes, chief. If the water of everlasting life were held to my lips
again, how gladly would I spill it on the ground, said Bright Robe.

And yet we fought and bled, suffered weariness and cold and
loneliness, to win that drink, replied the good magician.

I left a woman and child--a child of my blood--to starve in an empty
lodge, that I might drink of that accursed water, whispered Bright
Robe. Strike me, old enemy, he cried. Beat me to nothingness. I
would go, even now, and make my peace with those two.

Your spirit would still be bound to this old earth, replied
Wise-as-a-she-wolf, though I should strike with all my magic and
scatter your body to the winds.

For a long time they sat silent in the darkness of the lodges. It was
Bright Robe who spoke first.

I, too, have lost fear, he said, though I have been a coward at
heart since my mother bore me. For nine years I have been no better
than a slave of Black Eagles, because of fear. Fear of you, and fear
of the shadow in my heart, have driven me so hard that even the thirst
for blood is dead in me and I have no more desire for evil power. I
care not what you do with me.

When you recover from your wounds, said Wise-as-a-she-wolf, I fear
you will thirst again for power and blood and mischief. But I pity you,
Bright Robe, for the age of sleeping and waking and remembrance that
are before you. So I will deal with you as mercifully as I may.

There is no more lust of life in me. You cannot give me death. Then
what do I care how you deal with me? said Bright Robe.

For two days the hunting and slaying of the mountaineers by the
islanders continued, and not one of those savage invaders returned to
his own country. But as the cold continued as intense as ever, and it
was thought that the ice would remain in the Narrow Sea until spring,
Jumping Wolf marched his men westward and encamped them on the coast.
Wise-as-a-she-wolf took word of the victory to Run-all-day, and was so
cordially received by that honest chief and his family that his heart
lightened. He had brought the wounded Bright Robe with him, and he told
Run-all-day of Featherfoots encounter with, and overthrow of, that
magician. Also, he narrated his own adventures in the south; and the
chief growled with rage when he heard of the little arrow tipped with
poison.

Now you may rest, master, since your enemy is delivered into your
hands, said Run-all-day. Our people are strong now, and live under
the laws, and even the southward clans are at peace with their
neighbours. So surely the time has come for you to rest, master.

I have one more journey to make, replied the good magician. One more
long journey to the southward, and then I will lay aside the moccasins
of the wind, and sit at home and help you in your wise government of
the people.

The chief looked at him in wonder.

Help me! he exclaimed. Why, master, I am your servant, though the
strongest chief in the island. Whatever I have done for the good of
the people has been through your friendship and guidance. Yes, and in
little matters, Red Willow has given good counsel.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf looked at the woman, who sat nearby, with downcast
eyes.

Your magic is greater than mine, he said.

She raised her eyes and looked at him--at the strongest of magicians,
with something of motherly tenderness.

To fill a heart, even one heart, with love and trust, is a greater
matter than flying through the air, he said.

You are loved. You are called the good magician, replied Red Willow.

And I am feared, said Wise-as-a-she-wolf. Yes, I am feared, even by
those who think of me most kindly. But the time was when--

They waited, gazing upon their guest.

We are listening, master, said the chief.

I have forgotten it, answered the other. It was nothing. But I, too,
was once young and the chief of a village.

When Bright Robe had nearly recovered from his wounds,
Wise-as-a-she-wolf bound him with thongs, lifted him in his arms, and
flew southward. Night and day, the good magician ran above the sea,
and many lands glimmered into his vision and faded again. At last he
descended to the beach of an island, where mountains towered high,
robed in green to their summits. Between the white beaches and the
climbing slopes stood hundreds of cocoanut trees, their long stems
bent and their crests for ever shaken by the wind. The music of the
surf drummed around the island, day and night, night and day. Birds of
bright plumage and harsh voices flew above the hillside forests. No
other land was to be seen from any point of this island, but everywhere
the uneasy ocean and the straight horizon.

Wise-as-a-she-wolf broke the thongs from Bright Robes limbs. Here you
will find food and drink and shelter, he said, and somewhere on the
mountain is a small stream that flows with the water of forgetfulness.

Have you drunk of that stream? asked Bright Robe.

No. There are things that I do not wish to forget, replied the other.

Bright Robe looked at the sea, and the windy palms, and the towering
mountains. A shadow stole across his keen eyes.

And this--for ever, he whispered.

If you drink often enough of the water of forgetfulness, said the
good magician, then life will stretch no farther than from day to day.

He turned, hesitated, then faced the motionless Bright Robe again.

There is a village beyond the mountain. Be wise, for I do not forget.

Then he sprang high into the blustering wind.


THE END.




  Selections from
  The Page Companys
  Books for Young People


THE BLUE BONNET SERIES

  _Each large 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated, per volume_     $1.50


A TEXAS BLUE BONNET
  By CAROLINE E. JACOBS.

The books heroine, Blue Bonnet, has the very finest kind of
wholesome, honest, lively girlishness.--_Chicago Inter-Ocean._


BLUE BONNETS RANCH PARTY
  By CAROLINE E. JACOBS AND EDYTH ELLERBECK READ.

A healthy, natural atmosphere breathes from every chapter.--_Boston
Transcript._


BLUE BONNET IN BOSTON; OR, BOARDING-SCHOOL DAYS AT MISS NORTHS.
  By CAROLINE E. JACOBS AND LELA HORN RICHARDS.

It is bound to become popular because of its wholesomeness and its
many human touches.--_Boston Globe._


BLUE BONNET KEEPS HOUSE; OR, THE NEW HOME IN THE EAST.
  By CAROLINE E. JACOBS AND LELA HORN RICHARDS.

It cannot fail to prove fascinating to girls in their teens.--_New
York Sun._


BLUE BONNET--DBUTANTE
  By LELA HORN RICHARDS.

An interesting picture of the unfolding of life for Blue Bonnet.




THE YOUNG PIONEER SERIES

By HARRISON ADAMS

  _Each 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated, per volume_           $1.25


THE PIONEER BOYS OF THE OHIO; OR, CLEARING THE WILDERNESS.

Such books as this are an admirable means of stimulating among the
young Americans of to-day interest in the story of their pioneer
ancestors and the early days of the Republic.--_Boston Globe._


THE PIONEER BOYS ON THE GREAT LAKES; OR, ON THE TRAIL OF THE IROQUOIS.

The recital of the daring deeds of the frontier is not only
interesting but instructive as well and shows the sterling
type of character which these days of self-reliance and trial
produced.--_American Tourist, Chicago._


THE PIONEER BOYS OF THE MISSISSIPPI; OR, THE HOMESTEAD IN THE WILDERNESS.

The story is told with spirit, and is full of adventure.--_New York
Sun._


THE PIONEER BOYS OF THE MISSOURI; OR, IN THE COUNTRY OF THE SIOUX.

Vivid in style, vigorous in movement, full of dramatic situations,
true to historic perspective, this story is a capital one for
boys.--_Watchman Examiner, New York City._


THE PIONEER BOYS OF THE YELLOWSTONE; OR, LOST IN THE LAND OF WONDERS.

There is plenty of lively adventure and action and the story is well
told.--_Duluth Herald, Duluth, Minn._


THE PIONEER BOYS OF THE COLUMBIA; OR, IN THE WILDERNESS OF THE GREAT
  NORTHWEST.

The story is full of spirited action and contains much valuable
historical information.--_Boston Herald._




THE HADLEY HALL SERIES

By LOUISE M. BREITENBACH

  _Each large 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated, per volume_     $1.50


ALMA AT HADLEY HALL

The author is to be congratulated on having written such an appealing
book for girls.--_Detroit Free Press._


ALMAS SOPHOMORE YEAR

It cannot fail to appeal to the lovers of good things in girls
books.--_Boston Herald._


ALMAS JUNIOR YEAR

The diverse characters in the boarding-school are strongly drawn,
the incidents are well developed and the action is never dull.--_The
Boston Herald._


ALMAS SENIOR YEAR

Incident abounds in all of Miss Breitenbachs stories and a healthy,
natural atmosphere breathes from every chapter.--_Boston Transcript._




THE GIRLS OF FRIENDLY TERRACE SERIES

By HARRIET LUMMIS SMITH

  _Each large 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated, per volume_     $1.50


THE GIRLS OF FRIENDLY TERRACE

A book sure to please girl readers, for the author seems to understand
perfectly the girl character.--_Boston Globe._


PEGGY RAYMONDS VACATION

It is a wholesome, hearty story.--_Utica Observer._


PEGGY RAYMONDS SCHOOL DAYS

The book is delightfully written, and contains lots of exciting
incidents.




FAMOUS LEADERS SERIES

By CHARLES H. L. JOHNSTON

  _Each large 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated, per volume_     $1.50


FAMOUS CAVALRY LEADERS

More of such books should be written, books that acquaint young
readers with historical personages in a pleasant, informal way.--_New
York Sun._

It is a book that will stir the heart of every boy and will prove
interesting as well to the adults.--_Lawrence Daily World._


FAMOUS INDIAN CHIEFS

Mr. Johnston has done faithful work in this volume, and his relation
of battles, sieges and struggles of these famous Indians with the
whites for the possession of America is a worthy addition to United
States History.--_New York Marine Journal._


FAMOUS SCOUTS

It is the kind of a book that will have a great fascination for boys
and young men, and while it entertains them it will also present
valuable information in regard to those who have left their impress
upon the history of the country.--_The New London Day._


FAMOUS PRIVATEERSMEN AND ADVENTURERS OF THE SEA

The tales are more than merely interesting; they are entrancing,
stirring the blood with thrilling force and bringing new zest to the
never-ending interest in the dramas of the sea.--_The Pittsburgh Post._


FAMOUS FRONTIERSMEN AND HEROES OF THE BORDER

The accounts are not only authentic, but distinctly readable,
making a book of wide appeal to all who love the history of actual
adventure.--_Cleveland Leader._


FAMOUS DISCOVERERS AND EXPLORERS OF AMERICA

The book is an epitome of some of the wildest and bravest adventures
of which the world has known and of discoveries which have changed the
face of the old world as well as of the new.--_Brooklyn Daily Eagle._




TRANSCRIBERS NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Perceived typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

  New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
    public domain.

[Illustration: Cover art]




[Frontispiece: "It was not safe for a warrior to so much as show his
nose outside of his hiding-place" (_See page_ 45)]




[Illustration: Title page]




  _Flying Plover_

  HIS STORIES, TOLD HIM BY SQUAT-BY-THE-FIRE


  BY

  G. E. THEODORE ROBERTS


  _Author of
  "The Red Feathers," "Hemming, the Adventurer," "Captain Love," etc._


  ILLUSTRATED & DECORATED BY
  CHARLES LIVINGSTON BULL


  _L. C. Page & Company_
  BOSTON * MDCCCCIX




  _Copyright_, 1909,
  BY L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
  (INCORPORATED)


  _All rights reserved_


  First impression, June, 1909



  THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.




CONTENTS


I. The Mountaineer People

II. The Bear, The Moose, and the Walrus

III. Adventures of King Bear Continued

IV. How Fire came to the Mountaineers

V. How Porcupine Killer learned still more about the Wonderful Fire

VI. Why Old King Walrus went away from the Mountaineers' Country

VII. Another Story of Gluskap and his People




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"It was not safe for a warrior to so much as show his nose outside of
his hiding-place" (See page 45) .... Frontispiece

"He left his hiding-place and chased the bear"

"'Here come a few of them now,' said the crow"

"He waved the long stick around his head"

"Away they ran, howling and roaring"

"Suddenly the great bear appeared, galloping heavily"




FLYING PLOVER



I

THE MOUNTAINEER PEOPLE

Both of Flying Plover's parents had died when he was a little baby,
and ever since--for six long years--he had lived with his
grandmother.  The old woman's name was Squat-by-the-fire.  She was
the wisest person in the tribe, in spite of the fact that an old man
who lived in another village said that he knew twice as much as
anybody else in the whole world.  She was deep in medicine and
history and story-telling.  She could paint fine pictures on bark and
cured skins, and was skilful in the carving of wonderful little
figures in wood and bone and walrus ivory.  She knew so much, and
looked so wise, and had such bright eyes, that many of the tribesmen
believed that she was a magician.

The tribe that Flying Plover and his grandmother belonged to lived
far north, in that bleak and unexplored country called Labrador.
They spent the summer months near the coast, where they fished in the
great bays for cod and seals, and in the rivers for salmon and trout.
They traded with the few white settlers and missionaries, and with
the Eskimo people.  At the approach of winter they traveled inland,
with the great herds of caribou, into the sheltered valleys of the
mountains.  As the winter is a much longer season than the summer, in
that country, these people spent the greater part of every year in
the mountain forests--and so they are called the Mountaineer Indians,
or the Mountaineers.  But this book is not about the tribe, but is
full of the stories that old Squat-by-the-fire told to little Flying
Plover, in the long winter evenings.

_You_ can not sit by the old woman's fire, and smell the herbs she
was always steeping, and play with the little figures which she
carved so cleverly, as Flying Plover could; yet I hope you will like
her stories, for all that.




II

THE BEAR, THE MOOSE, AND THE WALRUS

The other children of the village were afraid of Flying Plover's
grandmother, because of her bent back, and wrinkled face, and bright
dark eyes.  Though she had never so much as said a harsh word to any
one of them, and though her medicines had saved the lives of many of
them, yet they would never follow Flying Plover into the big lodge
where she sat all day by the fire, steeping her fragrant herbs and
thinking of all manner of wonderful things.  They said that she could
turn a little boy, or a little girl, into any kind of animal or bird
in the world, without any more trouble than snapping her fingers.
That was nonsense; but some of the men and women believed it, too.
Magicians were not very rare things in that region (at least to
people who believed in them) and you were just as likely as not to
think that you saw one every time you went out for a walk.  But
Squat-by-the-fire was not a magician, and could not have turned a
little boy, or a little girl, into a bird or a four-legged animal if
she had snapped her fingers for fifty years.  She was just an old,
good, and very clever woman; and though she loved little children and
was glad to be able to make medicines for them, she really was not
sorry that they did not all run in and out of her lodge, with the
freedom of her grandson.  Flying Plover had learned her ways and
wishes and never disturbed the pots by the fire or the big jars in
the corner; but she knew that the other children, once they felt at
home, would knock things about at a terrible rate.  And she was far
too old and busy to begin to teach deportment to all the children of
the village.  But Flying Plover never caused her any trouble, and was
not in the least afraid of her.

One evening, when the raw-hide door of the lodge was fastened tight,
and the fire burned cheerily and smokily on the earthen floor, and
the wind moaned outside, the old medicine woman asked, "What games
did you play to-day, little son of Swift Runner?"

"We played at battles," replied Flying Plover; "and they put me on
the Eskimo side, and so I was taken prisoner, and fastened to a tree.
I did not see much fun in that; so I made up another game, something
like deer-hunting, and we played that until it got dark.  But I like
battles best, except when I am an Eskimo.  Do the Eskimos always get
beaten in the real battles?"

"Our people have not been at war with the fat blubber-eaters for a
long, long time," replied the old woman.  "We used to battle with
them every summer; but it was a foolish thing to do, and brought a
great deal of sorrow and suffering to both peoples.  When my father
was a young man, our warriors used to chase the Eskimo warriors as
the timber wolves chase the young caribou.  But the missionaries have
taught us that killing and robbing are terrible sins--and I think
people should have known that before.  So now, when we want sealskins
and fish, we do not fight and rob, but we trade instead.  That is
better, for it does not call for the shedding of blood, the burning
of lodges, and torture and starvation, as of old.  Now the
blubber-eaters are a weak people; but hundreds and hundreds of
seasons ago they were a great nation.  But that was far beyond the
reach of my father's memory.  They were a mighty people though, once
upon a time; and then our nation was nothing more than a few weak
villages.  We were afraid of the blubber-eaters then, and never went
down from the mountains.  The Eskimo warriors chased our warriors
then, when they saw them, even as the timber wolves chase the young
caribou.  So it is with men and tribes and nations, little son of a
chief.  I have seen something of it, even with my own eyes.  The
Eskimo people were the great people; and next the Mountaineers were
mighty in battle; and now both the fat men of the ice and the hunters
of the mountains know that the white missionaries and the white
traders are their masters."

"That is very strange," remarked Flying Plover.  "The white men do
not look like great warriors, and they are very few in number."

"It is the mind," said old Squat-by-the-fire, touching her wrinkled
forehead with a gnarled finger.  "'T is the light inside the skull
that gives the mastery; though to listen to the story tellers, one
would believe that all the power lies in the biggest club and the
straightest arrow.  The minds of the white men are full of knowledge,
and caution, and courage.  That is why they are now the great people."

"They feed their brains with fine sweet puddings.  I think that is
why they are able to talk to our people so big and make the little
Eskimo boys go to school," said Flying Plover.

The old woman laughed; but it was not at her grandson's remark.  She
was thinking of the oldest story she had ever heard.

"There was a time, more than ten thousand summers ago, I should
think, when men were such weak, dull-witted creatures that they had
no mastery over anything but the smallest animals and birds," she
said.  "Oh, yes, that was a very long time ago, ages and ages before
the white man had ever been heard of.  The animals were the masters,
in those days, and it is a wonder that the poor, frightened creatures
that ran on two legs, and hid in caves and holes, kept alive at all.
Then, the wolves were as big as black bears, and the bears stood as
high as caribou, and the foxes were as big as timber wolves.  When a
hunter saw a fox, in those days, he was glad to climb a tree; and he
was lucky if a caribou did not come along and knock the tree over
with its head.  Or may be an eagle would catch sight of the man, and
swoop down and pick him out of the tree with its claws, as if he
weighed no more than a little brook trout."

"I am glad I did not live in those days," said Flying Plover.  "If
all the beasts were too big to kill, and there were no white men to
buy blankets from, what did people do for clothes to wear?"

"There were the hares," replied the old woman.  "They were six times
as large as they are now, but not much more dangerous unless they
were cornered.  And sometimes the bravest hunters managed to kill a
beaver or a musquash.  Even the mice were well worth hunting in those
days, and one fat mouse made a very good dinner for a small family.
Oh, it was a queer world, you may be sure!"

Old Squat-by-the-fire ceased her talk for a little while and opened a
leathern bag at her belt.  From it she drew a wooden pipe, a knife,
and a plug of dark-brown trade tobacco.  Soon the pipe was filled and
lit, and the blue smoke curling about her head.

"Did they have any tobacco in those days?" asked Flying Plover.

"No--nor fire to light it with," replied his grandmother.

The little boy was greatly astonished at that, and could not think
how people warmed themselves in winter, or cooked their dinner.  He
was just opening his mouth to ask about a dozen questions, when the
old medicine-woman, noticing it, hurried on with her talk.

[Illustration: "He left his hiding-place and chased the bear"]

"The king of the frozen north was a great walrus.  His tusks were as
long as a canoe paddle and his head as big as this lodge.  He lived
in a house built of icebergs, and was not afraid of anything in the
world.  This country had two kings.  One was a white bear, as big as
a trading schooner, and the other was a bull moose as tall as the
highest spruce tree in the forest.  When the moose was without his
horns he went far away to the westward and hid himself in a deep
valley--and then the white bear was king of all this country.  But
every year, as soon as the moose felt that his horns were full-grown
again, he left his hiding-place and chased the bear hundreds of miles
out of his kingdom.  So they went on, year after year, until, at
last, King Walrus heard about it.  Being a walrus he did not like
white bears.  The dislike was born in him, for, of course, he had
never had any trouble with bears himself.

"'I have no doubt that the moose is the rightful ruler of that
country,' he said.  'I'll just make a journey into that region and
set the matter right.'

"Of course what he really meant was that he would take the country
for himself.  He was growing ambitious.  He felt that such a mighty
chief should rule the whole world.  So one fine day in winter, just
after King Bear had sent King Moose trotting westward to his hidden
valley to grow a new pair of horns, up waddled King Walrus.  The bear
was five times as large as white bears are now; but old King Walrus
was ten times the size of the walruses of to-day.  King Bear saw at a
glance that he was not big enough to fight with his unexpected
visitor.  Knowing that all walruses are the enemies of all bears, he
did not have to think very hard to find a reason for the northern
king's visit.  His eyes grew red as the fire with the anger that
burned in his brain; but what he said was, 'I am highly honored and
unspeakably delighted at seeing you in my poor country.'

"'Hump,' grunted King Walrus,--for his manners were no better than
the manners of any other walrus, and, into the bargain, he was quite
short of breath from his overland journey in from the coast.  King
Bear saw that his only chance of keeping things pleasant was in being
polite.  He would give his visitor some valuable gifts, too.

"'This is an unexpected pleasure,' he continued.  'I was never so
honored before in all my life.  I am deeply moved by your
condescension.'

"By this time King Walrus had recovered enough breath to talk with.
'You will be moved still farther before very long,' he said.  Then he
laughed roaringly, for he had a very coarse sense of humor and
enjoyed nobody's jokes but his own.  The bear was bright enough, you
may be sure, and usually approved of jokes, but he did not laugh that
time.  He became so angry that he forgot all his caution.

"'What are you bellowing about, old blubber-sides?' he snarled.

"'Hey!  What was that you called me?' roared King Walrus, changing
his tune very quickly.

"'You may bellow as loud as you choose,' replied the bear, 'but you
can't frighten me with noise.'

"He was so angry that he was utterly reckless.  White bears have very
hot tempers, as you know.

"'I called you old blubber-sides,' he continued.  'I'll call you
worse names than that, if you don't go away from my country.  You
smell like rotten fish!  Go away!  Go away!'

"King Walrus was far too angry to reply to these insults in words.
His great sides shook with anger as the sea shakes with storm.  Like
a mountain lurching from its place, he floundered after King Bear at
the top of his speed, bellowing all the while like summer thunder.
The earth groaned and trembled--and King Bear ran like a frightened
hare.  He ran all day and all night; and not until then did the
bellowing of old King Walrus fall to silence behind him.  Then he sat
down and growled and groaned and snarled, so enraged was he at
finding himself an outcast from his own country.  At last he became
quieter and began to use his wits.

"'Old blubber-sides is too big for me,' he said--'and I think the
Moose will find the same trouble, when he gets back.  But here is a
country that does not look as if anyone governed it.  I'll be king of
this country.'

"It was a very dreary looking land in which the big white bear now
found himself.  He had never seen it before; and he had run so fast
and so blindly that he really did not know by what course he had come
or in what part of the world he was.  He went to the top of a hill
and looked all around him.  Nowhere was there any sign of woods or
water or sea-ice.  On every side, and right away to the edge of the
sky, lay rounded, treeless hills and wide, dreary barrens all covered
with snow.  The sight made the bear feel dreadfully grumpy, for
nowhere could be seen any movement of life--any promise of dinner.
And he was so hungry, after his long run, that his stomach felt as if
it contained a lump of ice."




III

ADVENTURES OF KING BEAR CONTINUED

Old Squat-by-the-fire ceased her talking and, with tender care,
knocked the ashes out of her pipe into the palm of her left hand.
She gazed narrowly at the ashes, before blowing them into the fire.

"That was good tobacco," she said.  "Every little bit of it turned
into smoke.  Indian tobacco was not so good; but just to think that
there once was a time when people didn't have any fire, even to light
their pipes and warm their bones at.  That must have been much worse
than not having any tobacco."

"Or to cook their dinners at," said little Flying Plover.  The old
woman nodded.  Her bright eyes were on the fire, and she was deep in
meditation.  Flying Plover watched her in silence for fully two
minutes.  Then he said, "I think King Bear was in King Walrus's
country."

"You are wrong.  But it is time for you to go to bed," said
Squat-by-the-fire.

"I am not sleepy.  Please tell me some more about King Bear," begged
the little boy.

"Well," said the old woman, "he stood on the top of the hill and
growled and roared, just as loud as he could, to see if anything
would hear him and come to find out his trouble.  Presently a crow
appeared out of the gray sky, and alighted on the snow.

"'You are making a horrible noise,' said the crow.  'What's the
matter with you?'

"'I am hungry,' replied the bear.  'Who is king of this country?'

"'We have no king.  This country is ruled by the people,' said the
bird.

"'Oh!' remarked King Bear, and scratched his ear.  He had never in
all his life heard of a country without a chief or a king.  'It looks
like a poor sort of place.  Where are the people?'

"'Here come a few of them now,' said the crow, turning his head over
his shoulder.  Sure enough, there were six wolves and two black bears
approaching the hill at a fast run.

[Illustration: "'Here come a few of them now,' said the crow"]

"'They don't seem to be at all afraid of me,' said King Bear,
gruffly.  'And yet I am big enough to kill them all with one of my
paws.'

"'You are very big,' admitted the crow.  'You are the biggest bear I
ever saw--and you seem to be colored wrong, too.  But that is neither
here nor there.  We do not think much of size in this country.'

"'Oh, don't you?' snarled King Bear.  'Well, perhaps you'll change
your views before very long.  And what do you mean by saying I am
colored wrong?'

"'Black and brown are the correct colors for bears,' said the crow.
'Dirty white looks both foolish and untidy.'

"Just then the six wolves and the two black bears reached the bottom
of the hill.  There they halted, and one of the wolves cried out,
'What are you doing here, big stranger?'

"'I am sitting on the top of a hill, admiring your beautiful
country,' replied the white bear, in a snarly voice.

"'What do you want?' asked the wolf.

"'Something to eat,' said the white bear.

"'Where did you come from?' asked the wolf.

"'You miserable creature, I came from my own country where I am
king,' roared the bear.  'And I want you to know that I did not come
here to answer your questions!  Bring me something to eat--a fat
caribou, or a couple of seals--or I'll try my teeth on you!'

"'Your talk is as big as your body; but neither big words nor big
bodies are much thought of in this country,' replied the wolf.

"King Bear was astonished at the wolf's daring in speaking to him so
impudently.  He had never been spoken to in that way before by any
common animal or bird.  Of course King Moose, his rival, had said
rude things to him every year; but that was to be expected and was
between kings.  But it made his blood bubble in his brain to hear
such words from that ordinary wolf, and to see the other common
creatures, and the crow grinning at the talk.  He was so angry that
he almost forgot the hungry-pain in his stomach.

"'I am a great king,' he roared, and got to his feet, ready to
destroy the six wolves and the two black bears with one sweep of his
mighty right paw.  But he did not do it!  He saw something running on
the snow, so fast that he could not make out what it was--and
suddenly it stopped close under his great nose and he saw that it was
a slim young man.  He was so astonished that he squatted back on his
haunches.

"'I have been listening to you,' said the young man, 'and I do not
like your talk.  Also, I do not like your looks.  You are too big and
too bold to be a safe companion for my people.'

"King Bear could do nothing but stare.

"'I am Gluskap,' continued the young man, 'and all the men and
animals in this land, for seven times as far as you can see in every
direction, are in my care.'

"'I never heard of you,' said the big white bear.

"The young man smiled at that.  Then he pointed his finger at the
stranger and gazed at him very hard with his bright eyes.

"'I feel queer.  My head spins 'round and 'round,' said the bear.  He
began to sway from side to side.  He stood on his four strong legs;
but still he swayed and swayed, and his mouth hung open and he
breathed very hard.

"'What--are--you--doing--to--me?' he gasped.

"'I am reducing you,' replied the young man.

"King Bear did not know what that meant--and he felt so queer that he
did not care.  All the white world seemed to go whirling around him.
At last he fell over, flat on his side.  And as soon as that had
happened he felt quite well again and jumped to his feet.  Well, he
blinked his red eyes and he glared and glared, for it looked to him
as if the man, the crow, the wolves, and the black bears had all
grown much larger.  But that was not what had happened at all.  The
change was in himself and not in the others.  Gluskap, with his
magic, had made him smaller and smaller until he was just exactly the
size of white bears now and smaller than common black bears were in
those days.

"'Now that you are a small bear and not at all dangerous to the peace
of this country, you may come with me and have something to eat,'
said Gluskap.  'And if you behave yourself I think my people will be
kind to you and let you live in this country.  Come, it is dinner
time.'

"He turned toward the south and walked slowly away.  Then the white
bear followed him, wondering to find himself so mild and obedient.
The other animals followed, too, and the crow flew on ahead.  One of
the wolves walked beside the white bear.

"'The crow told me that this country was without a king,' said the
bear.  'But that man is your king, surely!'

"'Oh, now, he is one of the gods,' said the wolf.  'He feeds us, and
keeps our enemies from harming us.  Is that what kings do for their
people?'

"'I never heard of a king doing things like that,' replied the white
bear.  'But what does he feed you with?' he asked, for again he felt
the hungry-pain in his stomach--and though he was so much smaller
now, the pain felt just as big as when he was his old size.

"'Just whatever you want,' said the wolf.  'His lodge is behind the
next hill, so you will soon know as much about it as I know.  All the
men and animals and birds are there by now, I think, waiting for
their food.  Don't you hear them talking?'  Oh, yes the white bear
heard them talking.  It sounded just like the running of sea waves up
and back along a pebbly shore.  And now the scents of that hidden
multitude reached his keen nose.  He smelt every kind of living
creature he had ever smelled before in all his life, except fish and
seals.  He knew that men were there, beyond the hill, and moose,
caribou, bears, wolves, foxes, otters, wild-cats, mink, porcupine,
red deer, woodchucks, hares, mice, beaver, muskrats, badgers, and all
kinds of birds.

"'Hah, that smells good,' he said, and sniffed very hard.  'That
certainly smells like a fine dinner.  I'll be puzzled to know what to
eat first.  A fat beaver would not be bad to start with, as there
does not seem to be any kind of fresh fish.'

"'You are all wrong.  You will not be allowed to eat any of those
animals.  They are waiting for their dinners just as hungrily as you
are; and what would they think, do you suppose, if Gluskap allowed
you to kill them and eat them?'

"'Then what on earth are we going to eat?' asked the white bear.

"'You'll soon find that out for yourself,' replied the wolf.

"Gluskap led the way straight up the side of the steep hill.  There,
on the other side, stood a great lodge of poles and bark, surrounded
by several hundred men, thousands of animals, and great flocks of
birds settling down and flying up and lighting again.  The white bear
gazed at the scene in astonishment.  There stood wolves and caribou
side by side, and hares and wild-cats lay together on the snow.

"'Why don't they fight?' he asked.  'Why don't the bears and wolves
eat the silly little men and the fat hares and beavers?'

"'No need of it,' said the wolf.  'It is easier to eat Gluskap's
food.'

"Now they halted at the edge of the crowd.  They saw Gluskap walk
into his great lodge.  Soon he came out with a basket in one hand.
He walked among the men and animals, scattering on every side
something that looked like sand.  The moment those little grains
touched the ground, each one became a piece of food.  A grain that
dropped in front of a beaver became a juicy fragment of pond-lily
root.  The grains that fell before the caribou turned into bundles of
caribou-moss.  The grains that fell near the bears and wolves and men
became meat and fish of many kinds.  Well, it was the most wonderful
thing that the white bear had ever dreamed of; and when he suddenly
found a big, fresh salmon and a lump of beaver flesh under his very
nose, he was too happy to do anything but eat and eat."

Old Squat-by-the-fire ceased her story-telling, leaned back against a
heap of robes and blankets, and closed her eyes.

"Did Gluskap make all the food out of sand?" asked Flying Plover.

"Yes.  Now you must go to bed, little son of a chief."

"Did King Bear stay with Gluskap?"

"Yes.  Go to bed now, Flying Plover."

"Didn't he ever go back to his own country?"

"Perhaps he did.  I don't know.  Go to bed."

"What happened to old King Walrus?"

"I won't tell you to-night.  Go to bed!"

"Did King Moose come home and fight him?"

"Go to bed!  Go to bed!  Go--to--bed!"

So, at last, while the fire still burned brightly, little Flying
Plover went to bed under a soft robe of furs--and with most of his
clothes on too.  But his grandmother sat up for an hour or two
longer, and smoked another pipeful of tobacco.




IV

HOW FIRE CAME TO THE MOUNTAINEERS

Flying Plover was awake bright and early next morning, and went right
out in the cold and snow to get wood for his grandmother's fire.  The
men of the village always kept the old medicine-woman's wood pile
well supplied--so the little boy had no chopping to do, but just
carried armfuls of dry sticks into the lodge.  Though it was nearly
breakfast time, the sun was not yet up; but a narrow yellow band
edged the horizon in one place, and in the faint twilight several
people besides Flying Plover were moving about out of doors.  Some
were getting wood, and some were carrying water from the hole in the
frozen brook.  Big Hunter, the chief of the village, was feeding
frozen fish to his sledge-dogs; for he and his sons were going to
make an early start in search of caribou.  The air was very still and
cold, and the tall trees which stood all around and among the lodges
snapped in the frost.  Little Flying Plover was too cold to even
shout out to his friends.  This was the part of the day which he did
not like--the short time before the fire was lighted and breakfast
was cooked.  So he worked very fast, running backward and forward
between the lodge and the wood pile.  His task was soon done; and
soon the fire burned cheerily in the middle of the lodge, the smoke
streamed up to the peak of the roof and out into the frosty air, and
the old medicine-woman put the tea-kettle and the frying-pan on the
coals.

After breakfast, Squat-by-the-fire gave her little grandson a lesson
in moccasin-sewing; and after the lesson she kept him at work at
making a pair of moccasins while she steeped medicines.  For a little
while in the afternoon he worked at carving a caribou from a block of
wood; but it was hard work, and he cut his finger; and after a whole
hour of scooping and cutting, the thing still looked more like a
block than a caribou.  He almost cried.  In fact, two tears rolled
out of his eyes and half-way down his fat cheeks before he remembered
that warriors do not weep and hastily wiped them away with the back
of his hand.  His grandmother did not let him know that she had seen
the tears; but she tied a piece of rag around his cut finger and told
him to go out and play with the other little boys.

That night, old Squat-by-the-fire told Flying Plover some more about
King Walrus, and about a man called Porcupine Killer.

"When King Moose returned to this country," she said, "with his fine
horns all ready for knocking King Bear about, and found old King
Walrus here instead, he was not at all pleased with the change.  One
look at the big walrus told him that he had met his master, horns or
no horns.  But he was full of courage and felt that right was on his
side--so with a snort of rage he tried to roll King Walrus from the
hill on which he lay, sleeping soundly.  But he might as well have
tried to roll the hill from under King Walrus.  There was a short and
terrible fight--and then poor King Moose limped away and lay down in
a distant forest to think the matter over.  He hid in the forest for
many days and asked every animal and bird that came within speaking
distance where King Bear had gone to.  But not one of them could tell
him that.  All they knew was that he had been chased out of the
country by the old blubber-mountain from the north.  The moose was
very sorry that no one could tell him where his rival had gone to.
He thought that he and King Bear together could drive King Walrus
back to his own country.  But as there seemed to be no chance of
finding the bear, he continued to live quietly in the distant forest.
For exercise, he knocked the great pine trees over with his horns.
None of the other animals were big enough for him to fight with--and
King Walrus was too big.

"The walrus did not stay in this country very long; but while he was
here, men suffered even more than they had suffered before.  The
reason for this was that a great many fierce animals from the north
had followed their king into this country.  The whole land was full
of bears and wolves and giant foxes; and people--mountaineer
people--died of hunger in their caves because the men were afraid to
go out and hunt.  It was not safe for a warrior to so much as show
his nose outside of his hiding-place.  If things had gone on in that
way for another moon, I think the whole tribe of mankind in this
country would have starved or been killed--and if that had happened
you and I would not be sitting here to-night."

"Where would we be sitting?" asked Flying Plover.

"We would not be sitting anywhere.  We would never have been born,"
replied the old woman.

"Why not?" asked the little boy.

But Squat-by-the-fire knew that if she answered any more of his
questions he would keep her busy all night.  So she hastened on with
her story.

"There was a young man named Porcupine Killer," she continued.  "He
had once killed a porcupine with only a flint knife for a weapon--and
porcupines in those days were larger than bears are now.  That is how
he got his name.  But the porcupine had been eaten years ago, and now
he was not able to go out and kill even a mouse.  You need not laugh
at that, for mice were then as big as beavers are now--and just as
good eating, too.  He knew that if he went ten yards from the narrow
mouth of his cave some great animal would leap upon him.  He had a
wife and little baby; and all the three had eaten for two days was
part of a fish that a hawk had accidentally dropped in front of the
cave as it flew over, chased by an eagle.  He could not think of
anything to do.  When night fell he would creep out and feel about
for some bones.  With so many great animals killing and feeding on
all sides there would surely be plenty of fresh bones lying around.
He had seen a pack of great wolves chasing a giant caribou along the
valley below his cave early that morning.  If he could find the bones
of that caribou he would be lucky.  The marrow in one of those bones
would supply them with many meals.  But as he had to wait until night
to begin his hunt and had nothing to do in the meantime, he lay down
on a bed of dry leaves and fell asleep.

"A wonderful dream came to Porcupine Killer while he lay asleep in
his dark cave, with his belt drawn tight around his stomach because
of the hungry-pain.  Some good spirit must have come and whispered
that dream into his brain, for in it there was hardly one thing like
anything he had ever seen; and yet it was all just as if he looked
down at something that was really happening.  He saw a place of flat,
white sand (at first he thought it was snow, for there is no sand so
white in this country) with the sea at one edge of it, green as
leaves in Spring and blue as the sky, and strange-looking trees and
bushes along the other side.  On the sand, mid-way between the trees
and the edge of the beautiful sea, stood a man.  Porcupine Killer had
never before seen such a queer-looking man.  His skin, all over his
face and body, was as dark as the roof of this lodge where the smoke
has painted it.  He was naked as a trout.  At his feet lay a bunch of
dry grass and a heap of little sticks.  In his hands he held
something that looked like a very short bow with a doubled, twisted
cord made of some kind of vine, and a piece of dry, flat wood.  He
sat down on the sand, crossed his legs, crumbled a little of the dry
grass between his hands and placed the powder close beside him, on
the sand.  Then, holding the flat piece of wood firm between his
knees with his left hand, he placed the cord of the bow in a notch
across it and began to draw it swiftly back and forth, back and
forth, quick as lightning.  The spirit of Porcupine Killer (for it
did not seem to him that his body was in the dream at all) bent close
above the queer-looking black man, eager to find out what he was
trying to do.  The stranger worked and worked, his hand flying back
and forth so fast that it could scarcely be seen.  The sweat stood
out on his black skin.  Soon a faint, blue mist crept up from the
notch in the slab of dry wood--or was it from the flying cord of
twisted vine?  It floated up and melted in the sunlight; then it
floated up again; and again it melted to nothing.  Porcupine Killer
could make no sense out of it; but he liked the look of the dry, blue
mist.  The worker now clutched the wood tight between his knees,
keeping his right hand still speeding with the bow, and with the
fingers of his left hand took up a pinch of the grass-powder and
sprinkled it where the cord of vine flew along the notch.  Now the
blue mist arose in a little cloud, and climbed high above the
worker's head before it melted.  It had a smell--a smell that seemed
very good to the spirit of Porcupine Killer.  His nose had never met
with anything like it before, and yet it awoke a strange craving
within him, and seemed to speak of comfort and safety.

"Still the strange man went on with his strange work, driving the bow
back and forth with his right hand and sprinkling a little of the
powder of dry grass with his left.  Suddenly the mist puffed white
and thick, and in a moment faded to something so faint that it had no
color at all, and yet seemed to waver upward and melt away, even as
the mist had floated and melted--and, in the same instant, a living
thing, yellow and bright and no bigger than a baby's finger, moved on
the flat piece of wood.

"It was like a bright, strange bird.  It was like a beautiful flower
that bursts suddenly into bloom and life from a husk of bray seed.
It was like magic!--like the eye of a god!--like the secret of life!
At least so it seemed to Porcupine Killer.  Nothing before, except
the feelings of love and courage, had ever awakened so much joy in
him.

"'What is it?  Give it to me,' he cried; but his spirit had no voice,
and the man on the sand did not so much as turn his head.  He was
still busy with the magic thing that had so suddenly come to his
hand.  Now he ceased the movement of the bow and let it fall on the
sand, where it lay unheeded, with a faint mist arising from the cord
of twisted vine.  He fed the yellow, living thing with leaves of the
dry grass, and it grew and leapt under his hand.  Suddenly he turned
to the little bunch of dry grass at his elbow--and, quick as thought,
every fiber of it had blossomed to red and yellow.  Now, from the
heap of twigs and sticks, he fed that wonderful, leaping thing that
had flashed into life but a few moments before, no larger than a
baby's finger, and that now covered a space on the sand as wide and
long as a snow-shoe track."

"What was it?" asked little Flying Plover, in an awed whisper.

"It was fire--fire like that," replied the old medicine-woman,
pointing at the glowing coals and leaping flames within the circle of
stones in the center of the floor.  For a moment the child looked
puzzled, and glanced at his grandmother to see if she were laughing
at him.  Then he nodded his head.

"Yes, the fire is alive," he said; "but why did the queer, black man
rub the bow across the flat piece of wood?"

"There were no matches in those days such as the traders sell now,"
replied the old woman.  "And fire could not be struck out of the
flint as it was when I was young, because there was no steel with
which to strike the flint.  All these things that I am telling you
happened a very long time ago, little son of a chief."

Again Flying Plover nodded his head.

"And then what did the queer man on the sand do when his fire was
burning so well?" he asked.

"I do not know what he did," replied Squat-by-the-fire, "for just
when the sticks were crackling and the flames leaping high as the
flames of our own fire, the spirit of Porcupine Killer flew back to
his body and poor Porcupine Killer opened his eyes and found himself
lying on the bed of leaves in his dark, narrow cave.  And the
hungry-pain gnawed him again, and he heard his wife crying beside him
as she rocked the little baby in her arms.  But there was a lightness
in his heart that had not been there when he fell asleep, and his
dream was as clear as a picture in his mind.  He got up quickly from
his bed of leaves and dry moss, and crawled to the back of the cave
where some of his bows and spears were stored, along with several
pieces of seasoned wood for the making of arrows.  Without telling
the woman a word of his wonderful dream, he broke one of his bows in
two pieces.  But the string of caribou sinew was not what he wanted.
He felt about in the dark, and soon found some strands of tough
hemlock root which he had once used for snares.  Finding three
strands of a length, he plated them together into one thick, tough
cord--and with this he strung a piece of the broken bow.

"'What are you doing?' asked his wife.

"'Perhaps you shall soon see.  Have patience,' he replied.  The poor
woman thought that hunger and despair had weakened his mind.  But she
stopped her weeping and drew near to him, the better to see what he
was about.  Having fixed a short bow to suit him, he broke across his
knee many of the sticks and slabs of seasoned wood, from which he had
intended to make such fine arrows.  Across the flat side of one of
these pieces he scraped a shallow groove with his stone knife.  When
that was done, he collected ten handfuls of dry moss and grass from
his bed.  Some of this he powdered between his hands, as he had seen
the strange, naked man do in his dream.  Then, when all was ready, he
sat on the cold floor of the cave and began to draw the cord of the
bow swiftly back and forth across the flat piece of wood, just as the
black man had done.  He worked and worked--and at last his nose
caught the smell of the blue mist, though he could not see the mist
because of the darkness of the cave.  But he saw beautiful, bright
sparks darting along the groove in the wood.  By that time, his right
arm ached as if it had been twisted and beaten with a club; but he
kept the bow flying, and began to sprinkle the powdered grass with
his left hand.  Then (as he had seen in his dream) the small creature
of magic life--the bright, yellow thing that ate the powdered grass
and sprang upward for more--flashed into being on the slab of wood
between his knees.  The squaw uttered a low cry of wonder; but
Porcupine Killer said not a word.  He fed dry moss and grass to the
wonderful thing--and it grew, and flashed with a redder color.  Then,
doing what he had seen the naked, black man do, he slipped it from
the wood to the heap of dry stuff at his side.  The bright tongues
leapt upward, throwing a beautiful light into every corner of the
cave.  The mist, which seemed to be its breath, streamed along the
top of the cave and floated out through a hole in the rocky roof.
The man heaped fragments of seasoned wood upon it, one by one.  Then
he felt the heat on his face and hands, and all through the chilly
cave, like summer.

"'Come close,' he said to the woman.  'It is warm as the sun when the
willows have their leaves and the yellow butterflies swarm on the
sand by the river.'

"'What is it?  What is this strange thing that you have made with
your hands?' whispered the woman.

"'Nay, I did not make it.  It is the gift of some kind god, bestowed
on me while I dreamed,' replied Porcupine Killer.  'Come close, and
feel the comfort of it Do not fear it, for I am sure it is good.  If
it is not good, then why does the sight of it awaken joy in my heart?'

"The woman drew near, with her baby in her arms; and now, for the
first time in her life, she felt the warmth of fire.

"'It is like the sun in the spring time,' she said.  'It melts the
chill of the frost out of my bones, and gladdens my eyes.'

"But Porcupine Killer did not answer, for he was busy feeding the new
fire with all the wood he could find in the cave; and, of course, the
fire grew and grew, and sent showers of sparks flying along the roof.

"'It grows too fast,' cried the woman.  'You feed it with too much
dry wood.  It may eat up the stone walls of the cave, if it grows any
larger.'

"Just then, a spark dropped on the bed of grass and moss and leaves
and, in a moment, a little flame began leaping here and there.  But
Porcupine Killer, who had a bright mind, saw the danger.  He snatched
up the burning stuff in his hands and threw it upon the big fire.
The little flame touched his fingers.  He cried out, with pain and
surprise.

"'What is the matter?' asked the woman.

"'The magic thing stung me,' replied Porcupine Killer."

The old medicine woman ceased her talk and lit the tobacco in her
pipe with a brand from the fire.  Flying Plover waited politely until
he saw, by the clouds of tobacco smoke, that the pipe was well
alight.  Then, as his grandmother seemed to have forgotten to go on
with the story, he said, "I wonder if that was truly the way fire
first came to our tribe?"

Squat-by-the-fire glanced at him quickly, but never said a word.  She
knew that the little boy was trying to get her to go on with the
story--and that was what she had not the slightest intention of
doing.  If she went on telling him stories as long as he would
listen, neither of them would ever get any sleep, and her brain would
become quite dry and brittle from too much inventing.

"I think Porcupine Killer must have been sorry that he did not have
anything to cook at his fine, new fire," remarked the little boy.

The old woman was just going to tell him that people did not know
anything about cooking in those days--but she didn't.  Flying Plover
was clever; but so was she.  Instead of saying the words that so
nearly slipped from her tongue, she gave a raspy little cough.  Then,
in a faint whisper, she said, "My throat is so sore from talking so
much, that I fear all the skin is worn off the inside of it."

That seemed a very strange and interesting thing to Flying Plover.

"Oh, let me see it," he cried.  "How long will it take to grow on
again?"

His grandmother almost lost her temper at that.  Anyway, she soon had
him snug in bed; and it was not long before he was sound asleep.




V

  HOW PORCUPINE KILLER LEARNED STILL
  MORE ABOUT THE WONDERFUL FIRE

During the night snow began to fall.  In the morning the sky was
still gray with it; and all day it continued to weave its gray
curtains in the windless air.  So little Flying Plover stayed indoors
most of the day, cutting and gouging at the block of wood which he
hopefully believed would soon resemble a caribou, and watching old
Squat-by-the-fire at her medicine-work.  The old woman did not talk
much while she was mixing and attending to the pots, of steeping
herbs; but by mid-afternoon she was ready to go on with the telling
of her story.  Her voice sounded quite natural again, and the little
boy wondered that the skin had grown on it so quickly.  But he said
nothing about his wonderment, for he did not want to divert her from
the story.

"When Porcupine Killer felt the burn of the fire on his hand he was
frightened at first," said the old woman, "but he soon recovered from
his fright, and began to study the blazing sticks and red coals very
attentively.  He held out his hand, feeling the pleasant warmth.  He
advanced it closer and closer to the flames, noticing that the warmth
increased and still increased the nearer he went, until at last it
hurt.  Then he touched a red coal with his finger--and that made him
hop.  He sucked his finger, and thought very hard.  'It stings when
you touch it,' he said, 'but if you do not touch it, it gives you
warmth, like the sun in summer.  If I take a stick in my hand, at the
end where this wonder-creature is not eating, and thrust it against
my enemy, then, without hurting me, it will sting my enemy.'

"'Yes,' said the squaw.  'But look, it has eaten nearly all the wood,
and is falling smaller and smaller, like a snowdrift in May,' she
added.

"Porcupine Killer thought of a dry, dead spruce tree that lay near
the mouth of his cave, flat along the ground where a great wind had
thrown it a year before.  But he was afraid to go out, unprotected,
to break branches from this tree and drag them back to the cave.  It
was not yet night, and the giant beasts would be waiting for him.  He
saw one long stick in the fire that was burning for only half its
length and, heeding a voice within him that told him to trust in the
new gift of the gods, he took up the stick by the unscorched end,
crawled through the mouth of the cave, and ran to the fallen tree.
As he ran--'twas only the distance of a dozen strides--he waved the
long stick around his head.  It was twined 'round with red and yellow
flames, and smoke and sparks flew upward from it.  He saw two great
wolves spring out of the forest on his left, glare at him with
glowing eyes and gaping jaws, turn and flee back into the forest.  He
saw a fox (as big as a wolf of to-day) slink out of his path.  Then
he knew that this new and wonderful thing was as surely a terror to
the beasts as it was a joy to him.  They did not even wait for its
sting.  They fled, like hunted hares, at the sight of it!  And he
knew that this terror of it must have been born in the wolves and
foxes even as the joy in it, and love of it, had been born in him.
He leaned the burning stick against the trunk of the fallen tree and
quickly tore off an armful of the dry branches.  Leaving the flaming
stick behind him, he ran back to the cave and quickly replenished the
fire.  Again he returned to the tree and loaded his arms.  Three
times he made the short journey, swiftly, but without much fear of
the beasts.  He knew that many fierce animals were watching him; but
his faith in their terror of the burning stick was great.  When he
crawled from the cave to get the fourth load of wood, a wonderful
sight met his eyes.  The flames from the stick had leapt into the dry
branches of the tree and cloaked them in red and yellow.  Swiftly it
leapt from branch to branch until, in a twinkling, the tree was
blazing along its whole length, from roots to crown.  It made a loud
crackling noise and a roaring like the voices of wind and water.
Smoke and sparks flew upward in clouds.

[Illustration: "He waved the long stick around his head"]

"For a few minutes Porcupine Killer stood just outside the mouth of
his cave and gazed at the wonderful sight with awe.  The first thin
darkness was creeping over the world, and in the gloom the flames and
sparks and smoke made a terrible picture for eyes that had never seen
such a thing before.  But the little chill of fear quickly left his
heart as soon as he began to reason with his brain.  This
creature--one moment so small, and suddenly so great--was his friend
and the friend of all mankind.  It was a wonderful gift that had been
given to him in a beautiful dream.  So he ran forward and stood as
close to the fire as he could.  The heat of it was very great--and
the roaring of the flames and the crackling of the dry wood was loud
in his ears.  He knew that many eyes must now be staring at the great
sight in fear and astonishment and wonder--eyes of his fierce enemies
and eyes of his hunted, starving people.  Many caves were in the same
rocky hillside as his own.  With his back to the noise and the
leaping flames, he stood tall and brave against the terrible red
light and waved his arms high above his head.

"'Come to me, my people!' he cried, with all the strength of his
voice.  'Come to me, and this magic thing will protect you from your
enemies.'

"Broken Arrow was the first to find courage to leave his cave and
draw near to the fire.  He was closely followed by Winter Morning,
the chief.  Porcupine Killer told them in a few words of his dream
and how he had made the fire in his cave; of its comforting warmth;
of its sting; and how the animals feared the sight of it.  Soon a
dozen men and boys stood near the blazing tree.

"'Now is the time to hunt for food,' said Porcupine Killer.  'Do not
go beyond the edge of the red light.'

"They found the body of a huge caribou, freshly killed by the wolves
and but half eaten.  They cut the flesh from it with their stone
knives and axes, and carried it to their caves.  Porcupine Killer
worked with the others and carried two great lumps of meat to his
cave; but he kept his eye on the burning tree.  He soon noticed that
it was quickly lessening in size and heat.  All the branches were
gone and the great trunk alone glowed on the rocky ground.  Flames
and sparks still shot up from it in places, and here and there it had
crumbled to masses of red coals.  Dark night had fallen by now, and
the light from the fire was drawing in, narrower and narrower, every
minute.  By the failing glow of it, Porcupine-Killer gathered a great
many pieces of wood-roots and fallen branches and stumps, and heaped
them close beside the mouth of his cave.  He told Broken Arrow (who
was a clever young warrior) and old Winter Morning, the chief, how
fire could be kept inside one's cave and fed with sticks; and he
lighted two long branches at the glowing coals and gave one into the
hands of each.  Many of the other men, seeing this and hearing
Porcupine Killer's words, lit sticks for themselves and ran back to
their caves, waving them in the air.

"It was quite dark, and the great beasts were roaring and howling and
barking on all sides, when the first man who had ever made fire in
this part of the world returned to his cave.

"He found the fire burning very low,--just a bed of coals,--for the
woman was afraid to feed it with sticks.  He soon had it blazing
brightly; and then, sitting very close to it, he began to cut one of
the big lumps of caribou meat into small pieces, so that he and his
wife might eat after their long hunger.  One of the pieces fell close
to the red coals at the edge of the fire.  He did not notice it, but
soon he began to sniff and look about on every side.

"'What is that queer smell?' he asked.  'It is a smell that increases
my hunger.  What new thing have you in the cave?'

"The squaw told him that there was nothing new in the cave except the
fire and the caribou meat.  But she, too, noticed the smell and began
to sniff and sniff.  Her husband (who had not the baby to hold) was
so attracted by the strange smell that he laid aside the flint knife
and the big lump of meat and went sniffing around the cave, as a
hungry dog sniffs around the outside of a store-house.  But he was
soon back at the fire again, where the smell was much stronger than
anywhere else; and then he happened to see the small piece of meat
that had fallen close to the red coals.  Its color had changed.  It
was red no longer, but brown as a ripe nut; and from it floated up
the smell that made him feel even more hungry than he had felt
before.  He touched it with his finger.  It was very hot, so of
course he stuck his finger in his mouth.  Hah, but it tasted good!
He had never really liked the taste of flesh before, but had always
eaten it quickly, in big mouthfuls, simply to fill his stomach; but
this piece, that had been turned from red to brown by the fire, had a
taste to it that made him think of eating with joy.  With a small
stick he drew it away from the hot coals, and soon the sting of the
fire went out of it and he could hold it in his hands without feeling
any pain.  He cut it in two with his flint knife and gave one half to
his wife.  And they were the first people to eat roasted caribou meat
that I ever heard of!  They liked it so well that they cut many more
slices and placed them close to the red coals of the fire; and the
good, hunger-making smell floated out of the cave and set all sorts
of animals to sniffing and howling.  They liked the strange smell,
too (though they never learned to like it as well as the smell of raw
meat); but they were afraid to go near the cave in the rocky
hill-side from which the smell came, for out of that same cave shone
the red glare of that terrible thing which had eaten up the dead
spruce tree.  They saw the same red glare at the mouths of other
caves and what was left of the spruce tree still glowing angrily in
the dark; so they crouched in a great circle and howled and roared."

Old Squat-by-the-fire stopped her talk suddenly, and began cutting
tobacco for her pipe.  Little Flying Plover sat very still, gazing
into the fire.  He could see all sorts of queer things under the
dancing flames, deep among the red coals--lodges, and hunters running
beside dog-sledges, and warriors fighting mighty battles.

"Why were the animals afraid of the fire?" he asked.

"It was their nature to fear it," replied his grandmother.

"Why didn't it frighten the men, too?" asked the boy.

Squat-by-the-fire wrinkled her forehead and puffed hard at her pipe,
but did not answer.  Flying Plover waited for a minute, and then
asked, "Are animals afraid of fire now?"

His grandmother nodded her head.

"But dogs are not afraid of it.  Dogs like to lie by the fire, all
day and all night," said the boy.

"Dogs were not always fond of fire.  When they were wild--before they
had been tamed by man--they did not like it at all," replied the old
woman.

She puffed very fiercely at her pipe.  "But you must not ask me any
more questions now," she said.  "I must boil the medicine for Red
Cloud's baby again.  It is a very great medicine and has to be boiled
five times, in all, and let cool after each boiling.  So you must not
disturb me, little son of a chief.  Carve at your caribou again, if
the snow is still falling, and I will tell you another story
to-night, if you are a good boy."




VI

  WHY OLD KING WALRUS WENT AWAY
  FROM THE MOUNTAINEERS' COUNTRY

Flying Plover was a good boy.  He carved at the stubborn block of
wood until it looked quite unlike a block of wood and had four legs,
like a caribou.  Then he whittled away at two arrows, and mended one
of his snowshoes.  He did not once disturb his grandmother at her
medicine-making; so after the evening meal the old woman said that,
as he had behaved himself so well and worked so busily, she would
tell him another story.

"I want to know why all the animals are smaller now than they used to
be," said the boy.  "I want to know how that happened and when--and
who did it."

"Easy, easy!" cried Squat-by-the-fire.  "You go too fast with your
'want to know this' and your 'want to know that.'  Stories are not
told by the answering of questions.  You will hear about the changing
of the animals later--but to-night I am going to tell you why old
King Walrus went back to his own country."

She scratched her head, and stared very hard at the fire, as if she
found a good deal of difficulty in remembering the facts.  And that
is not to be wondered at, considering how long ago it was that King
Walrus went away from Labrador, and how many queer things had
happened since then.  Little Flying Plover often wondered at the way
his grandmother remembered those very ancient happenings, and yet
sometimes forgot little things that he could remember perfectly
clearly.  Well, she scratched her head, and stared at the fire--and,
presently, she remembered.

"When King Walrus heard about the strange thing in front of the
two-legged people's hillside," she said, "he floundered to the top of
a near-by hummock and looked at it in wonder and with a queer feeling
inside him.  The queer feeling was fear--and King Walrus had never
felt it before.  He looked at the leaping flames and wondered if the
sky had broken and the red sunset had fallen on the world.  He looked
at the smoke which poured up in black clouds and white clouds and
blue clouds; and he thought that they, too, had fallen from the sky
and were now hurrying back to it.  And the sparks?  Why, the stupid
old fellow thought those were stars.  His people--the smaller
walruses and bears and arctic foxes that had followed him from the
ice-fields--told him that the terrible creature was eating a tree
just as they would eat a fresh cod-fish.  They told him to listen,
and they would hear it growling and cracking the dry wood with its
red teeth.  The old Walrus listened, and sure enough, he heard those
terrible sounds.  So it was certainly not the sky.  'I hope it will
not stay in this country,' he said.  'Where did it come from?'

"A fox said 'One of the man-creatures carried it out to the dead tree
from his den.  It was very small at first--no bigger than my
tongue--and danced on the end of a long stick.  But it was frightful
to look at, even then.'

"'Why did you not jump upon it, and kill it, when it was so small?'
asked old King Walrus.  But he did not speak in his usual loud voice.

"'I had not the courage,' said the fox.  'And I saw some animals, who
are much larger and stronger than I am, turn around and run away,
too,' he added.

"Old blubber-sides could not think of anything just then but the
roaring fire in the valley below.  Though he had believed, at first,
that it was a piece of the red, sunset sky, now that he could hear it
growling and biting the wood with its teeth, he felt sure that it was
some terrible, new animal that would want to fight him as soon as it
had finished eating the tree.  But what had it been doing in the den
of one of the little, miserable, two-legged men-folk?  He lay there
on the hummock and stared and stared, expecting, every moment, to see
it move toward him.

"Then the fox who had spoken before said, 'The same man who put it in
the branches of the tree has another creature of the same kind in his
den.  I smelt it--and I saw its breath rising through a crack in the
rocks.'

"For a moment King Walrus turned his great head from the direction of
the blazing tree and looked at the fox.  'Go down and examine it
closely, and see if it has any legs,' he said.  For a few seconds the
fox did not know what to do or say, and felt very foolish.  He was
afraid of King Walrus--but he was much more afraid of the awful, new
thing down in the valley.  But his wits soon came back to him.  He
told the walrus that, of course, he would gladly obey his command;
and he immediately started off at a brisk trot toward the burning
tree.  He kept on in that direction for about a hundred yards, and
then, reaching a thicket of alders, he skipped in among the twisted
stems, changed his course, and ran for fully a mile in a great
half-circle.  That brought him out on a hilltop at a safe distance
from both the fire and the walrus, and yet in sight of both.  Then he
sat down comfortably to see what would happen.

"Well, as the wood burned away, and fell to coals and ashes, the
great fire in the valley became smaller and smaller.  Night grew dark
over all the wilderness, save where the sparks broke from the
bursting timber and the mouths of several of the men-folk's caves
shone red with the little fires within.

"'See, it gets smaller and smaller, every minute,' said King Walrus
to his people.  It is but a poor creature, after all, and will soon
be dead.  It is nothing but some foolish little magic of the
miserable two-legged people.'

"Then a wolf said, 'Yes, it may die, but I think it has cubs in every
one of the frightened people's dens.  And they will grow, quick as
water running over a stone, and they, too, may have many cubs.'

"At last the flames ceased to dance at all on the ashes of the dead
spruce tree, and the watching animals could see only a few red spots
here and there.  Hours went by, and still they sat on every hilltop
overlooking the valley, howling and snarling and roaring, and staring
with their wide, yellow eyes.  At last they could see no sign of life
at all in the fire.  Then they shouted, one to another, that the
terrible creature was dead; and a number of the bravest of
them--three walruses, and several bears and wolves--stole down to see
what kind of a dinner the body would make.  That is what they were
always thinking about everything--how it would feel in their stomachs.

On the way down to the valley, a bear and a walrus pushed against
each other and immediately began to fight.  Soon the smell of blood
was strong in the air, and all the animals that had started down to
try to eat the dead body of the fire tried to eat one another
instead.  Two great bears, with their claws and their teeth deep in
each other's hides, went rolling down a steep side of a hill straight
into the coals and ashes of the spruce tree.  Of course the fire was
not dead!  There was a great bed of hot, red coals under the ashes.
Little flames sprang up around the bodies of the fighting bears, and
began to eat the long, thick coats of fur.  The bears felt the awful
stings, and quickly let go of each other and scrambled to their feet.
Their backs and sides were smarting and their noses and paws were
terribly blistered.  They saw the red and yellow coals all about
them, blinking and shining like the eyes of wicked devils--and their
hearts melted with fear.  Away they ran, howling and roaring, with
the flames leaping high on their backs.  It was a frightful sight.
The animals that saw it, all dashed away to their dens, fearing that
the dreadful red creatures might chase them and spring upon their
backs as they had sprung upon the backs of the fighting bears.  Even
old King Walrus went heaving and lumbering away, and hid between two
hummocks of rock.  As for the unfortunate bears who had rolled into
the fire, they ran straight ahead, without caring or seeing or
thinking where they were running to.  They were blind with terror and
mad with pain.  They ran and ran until at last one of them fell into
Beaver River and the other into Black Fox Pond.  Of course the water
killed the fire on their backs and sides, but for a long time they
just swam around and around in the cold water.  At last, though they
still smarted and ached all over, they knew that the terrible
creatures had gone away from them.  So they swam ashore--one to the
bank of the river and one to the bank of the pond--and ran seaward as
hard as they could.  All they thought about was the quickest way of
getting out of that terrible country.

[Illustration: "Away they ran, howling and roaring"]

"Now it happened that Porcupine Killer and the other men of the tribe
knew nothing about the trouble of the two bears and the fright which
all the other animals had received.  If they had known they would
have felt very happy.  They had heard more howls and yells and roars
than usual, but did not know what the trouble was.  When Porcupine
Killer awoke he fed the coals of his fire with sticks of dry wood,
and broiled several slices of caribou meat for breakfast.  He was
very merry, and could not help singing when he thought of how life
had changed since the morning before.  Now he and his wife and baby,
and nearly every one in the tribe, had food to eat, and a warmth like
sunlight in their caves, and a friend that struck terror to the
hearts of the fierce animals.  His wife awoke at the noise of his
song (for he was not a very fine singer) and she, too, was happy as
soon as the fog of sleep had passed from her mind and she remembered
the wonderful thing that had happened.  After they had eaten,
Porcupine Killer said, 'I am going out to frighten the animals
again--and to-day they shall be frightened more than they were
yesterday.  This wonderful thing that dances and whispers so
peacefully on the floor of our cave is greater than all the fangs and
claws and tusks of all the animals in the world.  And it is my
friend--the friend of the tribe.  I shall hunt old King Walrus
himself, and cause him to repent of the evil he has done.'

"The woman begged him not to be rash.  The giant animals had ruled
the country so long, and hunted men as men hunt hares and foxes now,
that she could not believe that anything was stronger than the
animals.  But Porcupine Killer had no fear, since he had seen the
power of the fire.  He looked out of the mouth of the cave, and saw
the ashes of the fire lying black and gray on the rocky ground.  He
looked all around the sides of the valley, lying quiet in the
brightness of the autumn morning, and could not see so much as a
skulking fox.  He crawled out and looked to the right and left, at
the holes in the rocky hillside where so many of his own people
lived.  He saw little wisps of smoke rising here and there from among
the boulders and from the mouths of some of the caves.  He shouted
for the hidden warriors to come out.  Winter Morning, the chief, and
Broken Arrow were the first to appear.  Porcupine Killer called to
them that he was going on a great hunt, and that they should see
wonderful things happen before the sun had reached the top of the sky.

"'We saw many wonders yesterday, great Magician,' said Winter
Morning.  'What new wonders will you show us to-day?'

"'I am not a magician,' replied Porcupine Killer, who was an honest
young man.  'But the wonder you shall see to-day will be the hunting
of the fierce animals that have hunted us since the beginning of
time.'

"Six warriors joined Porcupine Killer in front of his cave.  They
looked at every hill and wood and rock, but could not see one of
their enemies.  'We are the masters of the world,' said Porcupine
Killer.  He took a burning stick in his hand, from his own fire, and
led the warriors to the other side of the little valley.  They passed
the long heap of dead ashes and coals, where the tree had burned the
night before.  The ashes were still warm, and deep in the middle of
the mass a few coals were still alive.  At the far side of the valley
they threw together a great heap of dry bushes and moss and fallen
logs.  To this Porcupine Killer set a flame from the torch in his
hand; and in a minute it was crackling and breathing and blazing, and
lifting clouds of black smoke into the air.  Then each warrior took a
blazing stick from the heap, and again Porcupine Killer led them
forward.  They had not gone far before two wolves sprang from a grove
of spruces in front of them and went galloping away.  At that, the
warriors shouted and laughed, and waved their blazing sticks.  It
made them feel great and brave to see the very same beasts that were
in the habit of hunting them turn tail and run at the sight of them.
They went up to the top of the hill and there built another fire in a
rocky place.  And so they moved forward over hills and hummocks and
barrens, and through patches of dark forest, sending all manner of
animals fleeing before them.  Here and there they built and lit new
fires, to protect their homeward trail; but Porcupine Killer chose
the places for these fires with great care.  'It does not eat rocks,'
he said.  So all the fires were made on rocky places, away from trees
and bushes.  Porcupine Killer had a thought in the back of his head
that it would not be wise for all the forests in the country to be
devoured by this wonderful new creature.

"At last the warriors came upon old King Walrus himself, lying sound
asleep in a narrow valley between two small hills.  He was all alone,
for his followers had deserted him during the night.  Porcupine
Killer made a sign to his companions to be very quiet.  They hid
along the crest of one of the hills, above the great, round back of
King Walrus.  Then Porcupine Killer gathered a huge armful of dry
moss and twigs, set it alight with his torch, and threw it down upon
the walrus's back.  Then, standing on a high rock and waving his
torch so that the smoke and sparks flew thick and fast, he shouted,
'Wake up, old blubbersides, and return to your own country!  Wake up
and see the Red Spirit sitting on your back!'

"Through his heavy, troubled dreams old King Walrus heard the voice
and felt a horrible sting in his fat back.  He lifted his huge head
and cast one glance at Porcupine Killer and the flaming stick.  He
felt the teeth of the terrible red creature, and knew that it had
caught him in his sleep.  With a bellow of terror that nearly
deafened the hidden warriors, he floundered out of the valley and
travelled seaward as fast as he could go."

Squat-by-the-fire puffed hard at her pipe, and stared into the fire.

"Did he get home?" asked Flying Plover.

"Yes.  He reached the sea, and dashed into the deep water, and swam
straight home to his lands of ice and snow," replied the old woman.

"And what did Porcupine Killer do?" asked the little boy.

"He went home, too, and cooked a fine caribou steak for his dinner."

"Did all the animals run out of the country?"

"No.  In time they lost some of their fear of the fire.  But they
were always afraid to go very close to it."

"When were the animals made as small as they are now?"

"That belongs to another story.  If I tell you any more now, my brain
will split and the skin will come off my throat again," replied the
old woman.




VII

ANOTHER STORY OF GLUSKAP AND HIS PEOPLE

"A time came when the great animals in Gluskap's own country broke
the good rules he had made for them," began old Squat-by-the-fire.
"They were so big and strong, and had become so accustomed to seeing
Gluskap in the form of a small young man, that they forgot how
powerful he was.  They were by nature fierce and bloodthirsty, though
they had hidden the evil deep in their hearts for many years.  The
trouble was started by a great wolf.  He stuck his head into a man's
lodge and glared at the man's children until they all began to cry
with fright.  Then the man was angry, and struck the wolf on the
snout with a club.  At that, the wolf caught the man between his
cruel jaws and killed him.  The taste of the human blood awoke all
the evil that had been sleeping for so long in his heart.  Then he
ran about the country, chasing men and women and every animal smaller
or weaker than himself, and killing many of them.  At sight of that
all the other wolves and fierce animals felt a madness in their
brains, and began to hunt and kill.  Gluskap left his lodge at the
noise and looked about him with eyes that could see for the distance
of a four days' journey.  At sight of the blood and the hunting
beasts he was filled with anger.  By his magic he made himself as
high as a mountain.  Then he caught the animals in his great hands,
reaching here and there after them, across hills and valleys; and as
he returned each animal to the ground it was as small as its kind is
to-day.  And this he did all over the world; and from that day to
this the animals have no more been masters of the wilderness.  Then
he led the men and women and children of the tribe, who had been in
his care for so many years, far away to a country of thick forest and
broad rivers--a finer country, I have heard, than even this land of
ours.  There they built villages and prospered, and for many hundreds
of years Gluskap continued to be as a father to them."

"What did his people do, in their fine new country?" asked Flying
Plover.

"They did many things," replied the old woman.  "I have heard from
Micmacs on the coast that in time there came to be many magicians in
that country.  Some of the magic was good, such as Gluskap himself
knew; and some was bad--and that was practiced by his enemies.  Yes,
he had many enemies--evil people who hated him because he always
fought against evil."

"Please tell me something about the magic," begged the little boy.

The old medicine woman thought for a long time, and scratched her
head very hard.

"I know only one story about the magic of Gluskap's people--and I am
not sure if it is a true story or not, for I heard it from a Micmac
fisherman on the coast," she said.

"Long ago, in the country of Gluskap's people--the new country to
which he had led them from the barren lands--there lived three boys
in one big lodge.  They were the sons of the chief of the village.
One day, while they were at play in the woods at some distance from
their father's lodge, they heard a sudden squeak and a sound of
struggling in a nearby thicket.  They ran swiftly to the place, and
were in time to save a little brown hare from the hunger of a
wildcat.  They beat the wildcat with sticks until it sprang away.
They carried the wounded hare to their lodge, and there washed and
dressed its hurts.  In a day or two it was able to hop about the
lodge.  One morning, when the father and mother were fishing in the
river, the hare spoke to the children with a human voice.  'My
friends,' it said, 'to-day I must journey far to the northward, on
Gluskap's business.  For your kindness to me each of you shall
receive a magic gift.  I shall name the gifts, so each can make his
choice, and to-night you will find them at the door of your lodge.'
The boys were dumb with wonder, for they knew that the little brown
hare must be a great magician.  'First,' the hare continued, 'are the
moccasins of the wind.  With these on his feet a man can run above
the tree-tops, on the currents of the air.  Second, is the wallet of
plenty.  With this at his belt, a man will never lack either food or
water.  The third gift is an arrow of red wood, feathered with red
and barbed with yellow metal.'

"The oldest boy chose the moccasins of the wind.  The second in age
said that the wallet of plenty seemed a fine thing to him.  So the
youngest got the red arrow.  Then the hare hopped away into the
bushes; and at night the three gifts lay by the door of the lodge.
The seasons passed.  The boy who possessed the moccasins of the wind
became a great hunter and warrior.

"When he was twenty years of age he was made chief of the village.
His lodge was spread deep with the pelts of wolves and bears and
foxes.  He was a great man--and all owing to the virtue of the magic
moccasins.  But he did not always remember that.  He was full of
pride.  The second brother grew sleek, and slow of wit.  Cooked food
and fresh water were always at his side, so he was content to sit
still.  But the youngest of the brothers was neither famous nor lazy.
He was a brave fighter, but he led no war parties.  He was a good
hunter and worked hard for his living.  He could find no magic in the
red arrow, though he had put it to many tests.  It shot no straighter
and flew no farther than the other shafts in his quiver.  But he
always kept it near him, ready for whatever might happen, for his
faith in its virtue was strong.

"One day in early autumn the young man with the red arrow left the
village of his people.  Something had spoken to him in his sleep, and
had told him that a great adventure awaited him in a far country.  So
he journeyed northward and westward, by whatever trails came most
readily to his feet.  Game was plenty, so he did not want for food.
On the evening of the third day of his journey he came to the edge of
a great barren.  It spread before him, treeless from horizon to
horizon.  But a little voice in his brain told him that his way led
straight on.

"After he had traveled over that great barren for more than two days
he saw a line of blue hills far to the north.  While he was still
many miles distant from them he caught sight of something running
swiftly toward him.  As it drew near him he saw, greatly to his
wonder, that it was a young woman.  Her eyes were bright with terror,
and she ran unsteadily over the rough ground.  When she saw the young
man she swerved in her course and ran to him, crying out that a
terrible wizard followed her in the form of a great bear.  The youth
set an arrow to the string of his bow; and, as he waited for the bear
to appear, the girl told him that he who hunted her was the most
powerful of all the evil wizards, and that he could take upon himself
at pleasure the form of any bird or animal.

[Illustration: Suddenly the great bear appeared, galloping heavily]

"Suddenly the great bear appeared, galloping heavily but swiftly.
Its small eyes burned with ferocity.  Its narrow, scarlet tongue hung
from its jaws.  As the youth drew his bow he noticed that the red
arrow was the one he had chanced to draw from his belt.  He loosed it
straight at the shoulder of the advancing beast.  It flashed from the
string and vanished.  The bear advanced.  The young brave trembled,
and the girl cried out in dismay.  But in a second the red arrow fell
at its master's feet, and across its haft hung the moccasins of the
wind.  In a flash the young man understood.  He tore his own
moccasins from his feet and replaced them with the magic pair.  Then
he returned the red arrow to his quiver and caught the girl in his
arms.  She felt no heavier than a young fox, so great was the magic
of the moccasins.

"'Have no fear,' he said, and sprang away.  Under his speeding feet
the earth swam back and melted behind them, and the gray, brown,
blue, and red of its tinted surface mixed like colored waters.  For a
thousand miles the wizard followed, now with the stride of a moose,
now with the wings of an eagle; but he was left so far behind in the
first half-second that he lost both scent and sight of them before
the magic moccasins had made a dozen strides.  So you may believe
that at the end of his thousand miles he was very far on the wrong
trail.  When the young man paused to take breath he found that floors
and heaps of ice stretched away on all sides.  The air was bitterly
cold.  Overhead the dome of heaven was alive with the magnificent,
drifting radiance of the Northern Lights.  The girl lay weakly
against his arm, for the speed of their flight had held her breath in
her nostrils.  Presently she opened her eyes and looked about her
fearfully.

"'How came we to this place?' she asked.

"'By the magic of the moccasins of the wind,' he told her, pointing
down at the gaily beaded shoes on his feet.

"She trembled and hid her face.  'It was like death,' she said.

"Then the youth understood that to endure the tremendous flight of
the moccasins one must also be possessed of their strength.  For
hours they wandered about in search of shelter and food.  In
unhurried motion the young man's feet experienced none of the magic.
He was thankful for that.  At last the girl sank on the ice, faint
for want of food and drink.  Then the man bethought him of the red
arrow, and, fitting it to his bow, fired it at a distance.

"'Its virtue is so great,' he thought, 'that it may bring a fowl or a
fish to me, to keep this woman from death.'  In a second the arrow
was at his feet, and midway on the red shaft hung the wallet of
plenty.  Thankfully they ate and drank, and hearts and bodies
recovered strength.

"Many moons later the possessor of the red arrow, accompanied by the
beautiful young woman, approached the lodges of his own people.  At
his belt, securely wrapped in water-tight skins, he carried the
moccasins of the wind and the wallet of plenty.  He was an honest
man, and wished to return them to the rightful owners uninjured.  A
mile from the village they met the second brother--the man who had
chosen the wallet of plenty from among the three gifts.  Upon his
shoulders he carried a great stick of maple-wood.  In appearance he
had changed surprisingly since the other's departure.  The muscles
stood out on his lean arms and legs, and his eyes were merry; whereas
of old his limbs had been heavy with fat and his eyes dull.

"'Why do you carry that great log?' asked the wanderer, after they
had exchanged brotherly greetings.

"'To split and store away, for the making of paddles and arrow-shafts
in the stormy days of winter,' replied the other.

"The wanderer handed him the wallet of plenty--but, upon opening it,
they found that it was empty.

"''Tis better so,' remarked the maker of paddles, as he hoisted the
stick of maple back to his shoulders.

"At the outskirts of the village, in a modest wigwam, the young
couple found the eldest of the three brothers, the man who had chosen
the moccasins of the wind.  He was lying on a couch of skins, and his
children played about the door.  His greeting was modest and kindly.
But he could not rise from his couch to welcome them.

"'In my pride,' he said, 'I forgot that my prowess in the chase and
the battle was all of the magic moccasins.  I thought myself the very
equal of Gluskap.  But the moccasins flew away from me, and in the
next hunt I was stricken to the earth by a wounded moose--for I was
no stronger than the youngest warrior and no swifter than the oldest
chief.'

"The new-comer produced the moccasins of the wind from the bag at his
side, and gave them into the hands of the fallen chieftain.  At that
moment a tall stranger entered the wigwam and took the moccasins from
his hands.  Then, turning to the other, he took the red arrow from
the quiver.  Already the wallet of plenty hung at his belt of blue
wampum.

"'The three gifts were equal in the sight of Gluskap,' he said, 'but
you see how you have driven their magic to the desires of your own
hearts.  Only the red arrow worked to its full power, and in doing so
it has doubled its magic.  Now Gluskap has need of it, and takes it
back as a gift from this young man.'  He turned, and glided from the
lodge."

"Who was it?" asked Flying Plover.

"I don't know; but perhaps it was Gluskap himself," replied the old
woman.

"Do you know any more stories about the red arrow?" asked the boy.

"Perhaps I do," said the old woman.  "But I'll not tell you any more
to-night."



THE END



[Illustration: End paper--left]



[Illustration: End paper--right]

Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 61911-h.htm or 61911-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/61911/pg61911-images.html)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/files/61911/61911-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/oxbowwizard00robe





[Illustration]


THE OXBOW WIZARD

by

THEODORE GOODRIDGE ROBERTS






Garden City        New York
Garden City Publishing Co., Inc.
1924

Copyright, 1924, by
Doubleday, Page & Company

All Rights Reserved

Copyright, 1920, by the Torbell Company

Printed in the United States
at
The Country Life Press, Garden City, N. Y.




                                CONTENTS

                        I. The Strangers Book
                       II. The Nick o Time
                      III. A Thief With Claws
                       IV. The Man in the Bunk
                        V. The Stiff Knee
                       VI. Fish for Bait
                      VII. The One-eyed Injun
                     VIII. The Adventure of Sabatis
                       IX. The Fight in the Snow
                        X. Fear of the Law




                            THE OXBOW WIZARD




                               CHAPTER I

                          THE STRANGERS BOOK


Young Dan Evans lived in the back country on the Oxbow with his parents
and his brothers and sisters. For as long as he could remember, his
Uncle Bill Tangler, his mothers brother, had been an irregular member
of the household.

Young Dan obtained a meagre and intermittent schooling between his ninth
and sixteenth years, at the Bend, three miles below his fathers farm.
His terms were frequently broken by the weather, the conditions of the
road and matters of domestic economy. Sometimes Uncle Bill helped him
with his books. There seemed to be nothing that Uncle Bill did not know
something about.

In October of Young Dans last year of school, Uncle Bill brought a
sportsman from New York or London or Chicago or Montrealfrom one of
those outside places, anyhowto Danl Evanss house. Uncle Bill and the
sportsman were on their way in to the formers camp far up beyond the
Prongs. They arrived, by canoe, just before dusk and were off again half
an hour after sun-up.

Young Dan was sent by his mother to the spare bedroom, to make up the
bed that had been occupied by the sportsman. In five minutes he was due
to start for school. He had no more than crossed the threshold when he
exclaimed, He was smokin in bed! On the chair near the dented pillow,
about the base of the little lamp, lay two cigar butts and several
deposits of ashes. Young Dan was distressed, for by what little he had
seen of the stranger he had considered him to be a very superior person;
and yet here was proof positive that he was possessed of a habit that
was looked upon, in that household, as both low and reckless. He
recollected a few of the words which his mother had addressed to Uncle
Bill on the occasion of her finding that versatile bachelor smoking in
bed. Its lazy an its dangerous an it aint respectable, she had
saidamong other things.

Young Dan approached the bed.

And him from a city full of street cars and schools, he murmured.
Hed ought to know better.

Then something caught his eye and distracted his attention from the
tell-tale butts and ashes. It was a book with a green cover. It lay open
and face down on the bright rag-carpet, just beneath the edge of the
bed. He stared at it for a moment, then snatched it up and thrust it
inside his coat. At one glance he had seen that it was a story book.
Good! On the Oxbow story books were almost as rare as ropes of pearls;
Young Dan was as unacquainted with fiction as a city alley-cat is with
yellow cream. In this case discovery of the discarded book seemed to
imply ownership and he appropriated the volume with the intention of
exploring its pages undisturbed by his younger brothers and sisters who
would be sure to demand a share in the volume once their eyes fell upon
its bright cover.

Young Dan hurried through the task that had been set for him and started
for the schoolhouse at the Bend, accompanied by Molly, aged eleven, and
Amos, aged nine. His canvas-wrapped school books and the lunch for three
were in his bag; and the book with the green cover was still inside his
coat. Here, against his very ribs, lay an unknown treasurea treasure of
valuable information concerning far lands or the stars themselves,
perhaps, or perhaps a treasure of magical entertainment. How was he to
make an opportunity for investigating it unobserved?

Suddenly he thought of a plan. He suggested a race.

You two go on to Frenchmans Spring, and Ill stop right here, he
said. When you git to the spring, give a holler and keep right on
a-goin as fast as you like and Ill try to catch you up this side the
school.

You cant do it, and you know you cant, said Molly. Even Amos will
git there ahead of you.

Thats as may be, replied Young Dan, with dignity.

So the others left him and hastened forward; and he immediately sat down
beside the road and fished out the book. He opened it at the title-page
with fingers a-tremble with eagerness. He began to read, running a
finger from word to word, from line to line. Here were people of types
and callings unknown to him, moving in the streets of a city unguessed
by him, talking in a way foreign to the Oxbow of things unheard of even
by Uncle Bill; and yet he read in a fever of intensity, with moving lips
and wrinkled brows. A faint shout of childish voices, touched with a
note of derision, came back, but it failed to reach the ears of Young
Dan, whose whole attention was fixed on the magic under his eye. He had
intended to keep his agreement, but he had completely forgotten Molly
and Amos; he turned page after page slowly and so at last came to the
end of the first tale.

Gee, but that feller was smart! he whispered.

He glanced up, observed the sun and jumped to his feet. He was late for
school that morning and accepted the reprimand of Miss Carten, the
teacher, and the jeers of Molly and Amos without turning a hair. At the
conclusion of the afternoon session he managed to get away by himself
and read another story.

With the green-covered book safe in his bosom and the secret of it in
his heart, a change came over Young Dan. Molly and Amos were the first
to notice it, but they could make nothing of it.

One evening, within a week of the passing of the sportsman, he appeared
at the supper-table when the other members of the family were already in
their chairs. After eating pancakes for a minute or two in silence, he
said, You set the table to-night, hey, Lucy?

Lucy, aged six, replied in the affirmative, with evident pride.

And Molly fried the pancakes, because Ma was busy writin a letter to
Granma, continued Young Dan.

An what of it? asked his father.

Did you spy on us through the window? asked his mother.

No, I was over in the tool-house, replied the boy; and when I got
nigh enough to look in at the window you was all set down to table.

Lands sakes! How dyou know Lucy set the table?

Because everythings so close to the edge. She aint tall enough to
push em on very far.

But howd you know Molly fried the pancakes?

Because most every one was cracked across, or messed about, when it was
bein turned. You dont do that, Ma, with the turnerbut Molly always
tries to turn em with a knife.

Sakes alive! Thats the livin truth! But howd you come to figger out
about me writin to Granma?

Theres ink on your finger, Ma; and Granma is the only person you ever
write to.

Lands sakes! Thats reel smart.

Seeins how youve growed so all-fired smart so suddent, maybe youll
tell me who went up the old loggin road tother night and robbed me of
nigh onto a cord of dry stove-wood? said Danl Evans.

Maybe I will, Pa. Whatll you give me if I tell you?

Give you? Nothin! You dont know, anyhow.

Dont I know whos got a horse thats lame on the nigh fore-foot and a
wagon with a hind wheel that wobbles? I see the tracks yesterday and
studied em.

You figger it was Tim Swan stole the wood. Well, youre wrong. I
suspicioned him myself, the minute I see the wood was gone, because
Tims a born thief an lives handy. But it warnt Tim took the wood. I
mooched round his place for over an hour an couldnt find a stick of
it. Maybe it was the tracks of a rabbit you studied so hard.

Maybe it was, Pa. Anyhow, I follered them rabbit-tracks along to Tims
gate and past it and clear on to Widow Craigs yard; and theres the
wood in her wood-shed; and she paid the rabbit three dollars for it.

Well, I never! exclaimed Mrs. Evans.

A few days after the frying of the family pancakes by Molly and within
two weeks after the passing of the sportsman in the care of Uncle Bill
Tangler, seven of the scholars who attended the little school at the
Bend came down with the mumps and on Thursday Miss Carten announced that
the school would close for a week at leastand perhaps longer. The
Evanses had escaped the epidemic, having been victims of the malady two
years before. Molly and Amos went racing home, making the echoes repeat
their whoops of joy. Young Dan walked more soberly behind them, for
there were many things on his mind and he meant to use his timewhile
the mumps kept the schoolhouse closedto test several theories that,
ever since he had read the book with the green cover, had been simmering
away in the back of his head.

But Young Dan got no leisure in which to test his theoriesat least he
was not able to try them in the exact manner he had plannedfor a
stirring and mysterious event that roused excitement in the whole Oxbow
region occurred less than twenty-four hours after the vacation began.
Miss Carten disappeared. She dropped from sight as completely and as
mysteriously as if a silent airplane had swooped down at night out of a
dark sky and had carried her aloft like a great-horned owl stealing a
birdling. On Friday someone asked for Miss Carten at the Troller farm
where she boarded.

She went to a party over to Camerons las night an took her suitcase
with her; I thought as how shed stop the night with Lizzy Cameron,
said Mrs. Troller.

At the Cameron place, two miles awayas it developed laterMiss Carten
had not been seen. No member of the family, in fact, had heard from her
in the last twenty-four hours.

There was excitement on the Oxbow which extended down to the main river.
Search-parties went into the woods, equipped with shotguns and lanterns
and stimulants and dinner-horns. Ponds and likely pools were dragged.
Justices of the peace, rural constables and game-wardens awoke to
official activity from the Bend on the Oxbow all the way down to Harlow
on the main stream. The days and nights passedsix of eachwithout
bringing any degree of reward or encouragement to the searchers. Nothing
was seen or heard of Miss Stella Carten, dead or alive, and no
suspicious characters were discovered in the vicinity of the Bend. The
lost lady had not been remarked on the road or on the river, nor had she
called at any isolated farmhouse. She had not been seen at the village
of Beans Mill, at the Oxbows mouth. She had not bought a railway
ticket at Harlow. She had vanished, suitcase in hand.

Seven days after the disappearance of Miss Carten, at eight oclock in
the morning, Young Dan Evans encountered his Uncle Bill on the portage
round Old Squaw Falls, seven miles upstream from the Evans clearings.
Young Dan carried nothing but an axe and a small pack. He had left his
leaky old basket of a bark canoe in the bushes below the falls, for it
was too heavy for him to shoulder. Uncle Bill, coming from the other end
of the portage, was bonneted by his long, green canvas canoe. The
meeting was unexpected to both, but only Uncle Bill expressed
astonishment.

You, Young Dan! he exclaimed, lowering his canoe to the trail. What
brings you way up here?

Left my canoe below the carry, replied the boy. Just moochin round
lookin for something.

Sit down, said Uncle Bill.

They sat down, and the man lit his pipe and pushed his big felt hat far
back from his forehead.

Looking for anything in particular? he asked.

Yep. Miss Carten disappeared a week back and Im sorter lookin round
for her.

You dont say! Disappeared! And you think shes maybe up here
somewheres?

Thats how Im figgerin it out, Uncle Bill. She aint downstream,
anyhow. Some folks think shes lost in the woods or been killedbut I
dont; I reckon shes run away on business of her own; and as she aint
gone downstream I guess shes come up.

You dont say! What makes you think so?

Well, she intended to go somewheres, because she took her suitcase
packed full, and her money. She wouldnt do that if she was just meanin
to stop a night with Lizzy Cameron. And they aint found hide nor hair
of her down riverbut Ive found her tracks, and moren her tracks, up
this way. Yep, I found the tracks two days back, about two miles below
this, close to the edge of the stream. I knowed em by the sharp heels.
I hunted both sides of the stream for a mile and dug into every pool,
but didnt find any more signs. But I found somethin else yesterday;
and now Im goin clear up the Prongs.

What did you find yesterday?

Young Dan untied his blanket and disclosed to his uncles view a small
frying-pan, a loaf of bread, a chunk of bacon, a book with a green cover
and a cardboard box. He placed the box in the others hands. It was
empty but had once contained chocolates.

Thats what I found yesterday, just below the falls here, he said.
Miss Carten was a bar on chocolates. She et em in school.

Uncle Bill examined the box and returned it. He scratched his
clean-shaven chin and regarded his nephew with a contemplative and
calculating eye.

Young Dan, youre smart, he said. And youre bold as brass. I am
smart, too, though that is not the general opinion in these parts. The
trouble with me is that I am shy. You are all for showing how smart you
are, but Ive always been for hiding my light under a peck-measure. You
are doing something now that I couldnt do. My natural shyness would
make it impossible for me to follow a young lady who has run away of her
own free will. That is how you have reasoned it out yourselfof her own
free will! Yes, I am talking queernot the way I talk at home. The truth
is, Young Dan, Im not the rube your Pa and Ma think I am; but Ive
always been too shy to let them know about it. I know more than which
side to butter my pancakes on and how to pole a canoe.

I guess maybe you do, admitted Young Dan.

Your reasons for thinking Miss Carten was up here seem good to
me!good, but not conclusive, continued Uncle Bill. If she is the only
person in this country who ever wears high-heeled shoes and eats
chocolates out of a box, then you are dead right. Hullo! Whats the
book?

He reached over, picked up the book with the green cover and opened it.

This explains your activities, he continued, smiling. Come on down
with me and Ill go back with you this afternoonall the way back to my
camp. And be your Doc Watson, going and coming.

Have you read that book, Uncle Bill?

Yes, years agoand several more about the same smart feller. You come
along down with me while I get some grub and mail a few letters, and
Ill buy you all the other books first chance I get. And Ill bring you
in again.

Young Dan shook his head.

Im this far, and Ill keep right on a-goin till Im ready to quit.

Uncle Bill looked at his nephew and saw determination in his face.
Well, then, he said, Ill help you around with your canoe, anyway.
You can pole right up to the campif thats where you are bound for. Id
go back with you but for a couple of important letters I have to post.

Together they carried Young Dans old canoe round the falls. Uncle
Bills lean, dark face wore an unusually thoughtful expression as he
watched his nephew embark.

Ill tell your Ma that I met you and that you will stay in the camp
over night, he said.

But maybe I wont, Uncle Bill, said Young Dan. I didnt calculate on
stoppin upstream over night unless I found somethin to keep mean
important clue or somethin. Theyre expectin me home.

Ive just been thinking that I might not be able to get back till after
dark. You promise me that if you go to my camp youll stop there until I
come back, or therell be trouble. And the trouble will start now. You
never saw me in a temper, Young Danand you dont want to. Promise me
that, or Ill tie you up and take you downstream with me as helpless as
a dunnage-bag. I mean it!

Young Dan looked at his uncle and saw that he meant it.

I promise cross my heart and honest Injun!but you got to fix it with
Ma, Uncle Bill, he said, in a thin voice.

Dont worry about your ma, replied the man, smiling. And Ill get you
those books. If I find some mail that I have to answer I may not get
back as soon as I planned. You stay right there at the camp, and dont
forget that I am one of the shyest men in the world. Off you go, Young
Danand good luck to you!

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER II

                            THE NICK O TIME


The boy poled slowly up the bright and lively water. Sometimes where the
stream was very shallow he got out and waded for fifty yards or more,
pulling the canoe along with him; occasionally he stopped to examine the
shore for signs, but all the while his thoughts were busy with his
uncle. He had seen fire in the eye of that merry, kindly manand he
hoped never to see it again. Why had he made him promise to stop at the
camp over night? A vague but frightful suspicion possessed him. Uncle
Bill had hinted at a mystery concerning his character and pursuits. What
had he meant? He had said that he was something other, something
smarter, than people believed him to be around these parts, and that he
hid his light under a peck-measure because he was shy. Now what had he
meant by all that? And why had he seemed so queer about his camp? Was he
a criminal of some sortand was the secret of his dark career hidden in
the camp?

Young Dan remembered that he had never known his uncle to be without a
roll of paper money in his pocket; but what he did to earn money beyond
guiding a sportsman now and then, was more than the boy knew. Was it
possible that this mild and entertaining uncle, who had two ways of
talking and who often vanished from the Oxbow country for months at a
time, was a robber? And might it not be that he sometimes committed
robbery with violence? He always carried a pistol in the woods. A
struggle might lead to a murder now and then! Miss Carten had been up
here with her money!

Young Dan worked his way slowly up the swift and shallow stream and at
noon he stopped to fry some bacon, but spent most of the interval
thinking. For two hours he sat there in the warm sunshine with his back
against a tree and his eyes gazing off into space. His heart was heavy
and numb with sinister suspicions of Uncle Bill. He had always admired
and liked that amiable and versatile relative; but he would go on and
learn the worst. When he finally went back to his canoe he realized that
he would have to hurry to reach the camp above the Prongs by sundown.

There were no clearings or human habitations on the Oxbow above Old
Squaw Falls. The voice of the stream was lonely; the cries of birds in
the woods were like the very voice of desolation; and the long, yellow
day was as lonely as a deserted house. The sun was close to the wooded
hills when Young Dan reached the Prongs. He continued his journey up the
Right Prong. It was already evening in that narrow, tree-crowded valley.
The water was so shallow there, and the bed of the stream was so broken
with mossy boulders, that he ran the canoe ashore and waded forward.

The sun was far below Young Dans narrowed field of vision, and the deep
track of the stream was full of brown twilight when he reached the foot
of the path that led back through the woods to Uncle Bills camp. The
plaintive cry of a whippoorwill rang from an umber gloom of cedars; an
owl hooted dismally in the tall spruces beyond; a fox barked on the
darkening hillside. Night-hawks swooped on twanging wings high overhead
against a sky of dulling green, and bats wove their flickering black
threads of flight in the deepening dusk of the valley. Behind and
through and over all lurked the spirit of the wilderness, watchful,
waiting, stilla spirit of mystery and menace.

Young Dans heart was shaken by a vague dread. He felt fear as he had
never felt it before, at any hour of the day or night, when alone in the
woods. He started along the thread of path that was worn among the roots
of the underbrush. He gripped his axe close to the blade and questioned
the gulfs of shadow to his right and left with straining eyes. So he
advanced for fifteen or twenty yards; and then, suddenly, he remembered
the character in which he had undertaken his journey. He knelt, struck a
match, cupped the flame in his hands and held it close to the trodden
earth.

There was a track, fresh and deep, that he had not expected to findthe
track of big soles thickly studded with blunted calks. Uncle Bill had
been in moccasins that day; he never wore calked boots in the woods; and
these tracks pointed only one wayforward.

After a moment of reflection, Young Dan continued to advance. He was
puzzled. When he reached the edge of the little clearing he saw that the
camp was occupied. Yellow lamp-light streamed from its one small window.
He hesitated, staring forward and around, then dropped on his hands and
knees and crawled from the shelter of the woods. His right hand still
gripped the axe close up to the heavy blade. So he moved among mossy
hummocks and blackened stumps toward the lighted window, pausing often
to listen and peer about him. As he drew near he noticed that the door
was shut; and as he drew still nearer he heard the murmur of a voice
from within. He crawled close to the log wall of the cabin, directly
beneath the open window, and crouched there motionless.

One voice was talking withina thick, unpleasant voice that he did not
know. And this is what it was saying:

So hell be home to-night, will he? Hell be home _to-morrow_, thats
when hell be home. An here I be, an youre goin to hand over all the
money youve got tucked away in this shack. Fust of all ye was sassy an
now yere sulky. Have a drink! This here is good stuff an powerful hard
to git these days. Here, pour yerself a drink an swaller it downor
Ill open yer mouth an make ye take it.

If my husband were here hed open that door and kick you out! replied
another voicea voice known to Young Dan. If you belonged to these
parts and knew him youd go now before he comes back and kills you, you
drunken brute!

Dye reckon to scare me? sneered the other. Then ye gotter think of
somethin bigger an better than this here Mister William Tangler yere
yappin about. I reckon Ill stop right here till he comes home, and
then yell know whos the best man of the two of us. But ye aint took
yer drink yet! Take it, dye hear! Itll loosen yer tongue.

The dazed boy beneath the open window heard a clink of glass, a scream
and sounds of scuffling. He raised himself and looked into the cabin. A
lamp stood among dishes on the table in the middle of the little room.
Beyond the table, against the wall, a man struggled with a woman. The
man had his back to the window. He was big and a stranger. The woman was
Miss Carten.

Young Dans quick eyes spotted a wooden rolling-pin on a corner of the
table. He laid his axe on the ground and went through the window as
quick and as noiseless as thought. Two swift and silent steps brought
him to the corner of the table. He grasped a handle of the rolling-pin,
advanced two more paces, judged the distance, swung his arm and struck.
One strike meant out in that game.

Young Dan bound the unknown and unconscious bushwhacker with thongs from
a pair of snowshoes on the wall and placed a folded blanket under his
sore head and let him lie where he had fallen. Then he sat and watched
his new aunt make coffee and warm up a panful of beans for him. She told
him of her secret courtship by Uncle Bill, and of their flight and
marriage by a parson friend whom Bill had sworn to secrecyall because
William Tangler was the most bashful man in the world. She told of how
Bill, who was thought to be so idle and aimless by the people on the
Oxbow, was in reality an expert in the science of forestry and in the
employ of the Government as such. Bill had gone out that morning to mail
an official report and also to mail his young brides resignation as
teacher in the little school at the Bend. In a few days they would go
out to civilization together.

Every now and then Miss Carten thanked Young Dan for saving her from the
drunken bushwhacker and she said so many complimentary things that her
visitors face turned the color of ripe choke-cherries. She said among
other things that she believed he was almost as clever and brave as his
uncle.

If I were Uncle Bill I wouldnt of been so shy, said Young Dan, who
felt greatly relieved by the outcome of his activities and very proud of
himself.

When the coffee and beans were ready, and the big ruffian on the floor
was beginning to grunt and sigh, Young Dan remarked, I guess Mister
Holmes couldnt of done that job much slicker himself. Suddenly he
cocked his head to listen. I can hear Uncle Bill coming up the trail,
he said. He offered to be my Doctor Watson, but I didnt need him.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER III

                           A THIEF WITH CLAWS


Young Dan Evans was done with school; and he had almost decided to hire
out with Josh Tod, as a swamper in the lumberwoods, when a letter from
Uncle Bill Tangler caused him to change his plans for the winter. The
letter, which came from Mr. Tanglers office in a distant city, ran as
follows:

    Dear Young Dan:

    Now that the frost is on the punkin (as a leading poet has
    remarked) and the swamps back of your pasture are frozen so
    hard that no woodcock can stick his bill into the mud any
    more this year (a fact overlooked by said leading poet) and
    folk on the Oxbow are frying fresh pork with their buckwheat
    pancakes and making sausages and fattening turkeys, my
    thoughts are with you frequently and enviously. It is a
    great country, Young Dan, and a grand season of the year for
    him who has wild blood in his veins and unimpaired organs of
    digestion. I should like fine to be away up beyond the
    Prongs this very morning, putting an edge to an appetite,
    instead of sitting here at this expensive desk trying to
    look like the only real know-it-all in the Governments
    service; but now that I have a wife who needs two new hats
    and an evening frock, and a furnace that eats up coal, I
    must sit in tight and steady to this lady-like job. But what
    about you, Young Dan? You have exhausted the educational
    resources of the Bend; you havent a wife or a furnace; so
    why dont you go up beyond the Prongs? You may use the camp
    as if you owned it. As for grub, youll find enough there of
    everything except bacon and condensed milk to last till
    springenough for two. So you had better go into partnership
    with someonewith old Andy Mace, for choice. He is an honest
    man and was a mighty hunter and fur-taker in his day. You
    will find half a dozen traps in your own garret and a lot
    more in the loft of the camp, all in good shape. You are
    welcome to them, and to my rifle as well, and my snowshoes
    if they are better than your own. Help yourself. That is a
    great country for fox and mink and lynx. You should have a
    prosperous winterso go to it, with your Uncle Bills
    blessing.

    P. S. Here is a little check. Take it to Amos Bissing at the
    Bend and youll find him willing to swap a few dollars for
    it, I guess. Your Aunt Stella sends her love to you and will
    mail you another book about Mr. S. Holmes as soon as she
    gets it ready for the post.

Young Dan was delighted with the letter. He showed it to his parents.
Danl Evans didnt think very highly of it as a specimen of epistolary
art, though he had no objections to make to the advice and suggestions
which it contained.

Bills reckoned a smart man, an educated at that, but if this here
aint the foolishest writ letter ever I read, then Ill eat it, he
said. I guess them Forestry people have kinder over-rated him. Thats
the Goverment for ye, and always has been. Let a man have a slick way
with him, an slithers of easy talk, an the Goverment gives him a job
of work with nothin to do. This heres a plumb foolish letter, anyhow.
Take this here about his indigestion now, an this talk about the
woodcock! What dye reckon he means? I aint had much education, but

Yere right there, Danl Evans, interrupted Young Dans mother, who
had held a very high opinion of her brothers abilities ever since he
had become a successful citizen of the great outside world. Much
education! No, indeed. Bills clever, an always wasan I, for one,
always knew it. I always knew he should be clever, anyhow, seein he was
a Tangler; an if I ever acted crusty with him it was his own fault for
hidin his light from me in a bushel-bag, so to speak. He didnt write
that letter to you anyhow, Danl Evans, so what you think about it dont
matter a mite to my brother Bill nor anybody.

This discussion concerning the letter from a purely literary standpoint
did not disturb Young Dan in the least, for neither of his parents
offered any objection to his acceptance of Uncle Bill Tanglers offers
and advice. He set out first thing in the morning to put the proposition
before old Andy Mace, who lived three miles below the Bend, in a log
house in a small clearing. It was a morning of sun and frost. The road,
recently deep with mud, was hard as iron; the sky was bluer than at
midsummer; a flock of geese went over, high up, winging tirelessly
southward; and there was a skim of black ice along the lips of the
Oxbow. It was a grand morning to be a-wing or a-foot and Young Dan
pictured Uncle Bill Tangler seated at his desk in the distant city with
a twinge of pity. Though there was no wind, red and yellow leaves of
maple and birch snapped their stems loose in some mysterious way and
circled down to the frosty moss, and the sounds of their falling came
out of the woods on both sides of the road like a soft whisper.

Young Dan found Andy Mace splitting stove-wood beside the back-door of
his primitive habitation. Andy had lived a great many yearseighty or
perhaps as many as eighty-fiveand most of them rough. His joints were
not as supple as they had been thirty years ago, but he was still an
able man and a first-class hand at all forms of sylvan activity.
Experience had taught him the easiest way of doing everything well, and
his inherent and acquired wisdom saw to it that he made the most of that
knowledge. This fact was demonstrated even in his present employment.
The round sticks of dry maple and birch fell apart under the lightest
strokes of his axe in a manner that suggested magic to Young Dan.

You do that slick, Mr. Mace, said the young man.

Well, Id ought to, at my time o life, replied Andy, straightening
his back slowly. Ive been splittin wood nigh onto a hundred years,
off and on, so its no moren to be expected that Id be a purty slick
hand at the job by now.

I got a letter here from Uncle Bill Tangler, and if youll read it I
wont have to tell you whats in it, said Young Dan.

That sounds reasonable, replied the old man, taking the letter and
seating himself on the chopping-block.

He fished a pair of spectacles from a hip-pocket and donned them with
great care. He chuckled now and again as he read the letter.

Smart boy. Bill Tangler, he said at last. Knows timber and folks, he
does; and I larned him purty nigh all he knows about timber. Weve
cruised the woods together months on end, him and me.

Will you be my partner, Mr. Mace, and go up to Uncle Bills camp with
me to trap fur all winter?

I sure will, Young Dan. I aint got hoof nor claw o livestock, and
this old house is used to bein empty, so I callate wed best start
upstream bright and early to-morrow mornin. Ill call at yer place
about seven oclock, if thatll suit ye.

It suits me fine.

So were pardners, you and me. What I got in here will just about
offset the camp. Andy pressed a finger-tip to his forehead. Well
figger out the cost o grub come spring, and Ill pay ye my half in good
green money. Folks hereabouts name me for a rich miser behind my back,
as yeve heared with yer own ears like enough, Young Dan; and thats
because Im a bach, and live in a log house, and let my whiskers grow.
Well, boy, theyre dead wrong about me bein a miser. Id smoke ten-cent
seegars if they tasted as good to me as a pipe, and it aint the cost o
city life that keeps me from movin to Harlow or Centreville or to Noo
York. No, sir-ee! I live here like I do because it is the place and the
way that suits my tastes; and Id still do it if it cost me twenty
dollars every week. You ask Bill Tangler. We took a jant once to the
Sportsmans Show in Noo York, him and me together. Ask yer Uncle Bill
about me bein a miser.

Folks round here didnt have Uncle Bill sized up just right, either,
returned Young Dan. I guess the most of them dont see much more than
what hits them plumb in the eye.

The old man chuckled delightedly at that.

Come inside and have a go at my ginger cookies, he invited. Ive been
makin ginger cookies nigh onto a hundred years, off and on, and now I
just naturally turn out the best ye ever tasted.

By the time Young Dan started on his homeward journey, which wasnt
until after dinner, he was full of admiration for his partnernot to
mention pumpkin pie, Washington pie and ginger cookies.

Old Andy Mace came to the Evans place on foot next morning, at the
stroke of the hour, with a pack of formidable proportions on his
shoulders and a rifle in his hand. He found Young Dan ready for him,
with the thin ice broken from the edge of the stream and Bill Tanglers
canoe launched and loaded. Young Dan took the post of honor and effort
aft and plied the long pole. They reached Squaw Falls by half-past ten,
made the portage, lunched and reembarked by noon. Old Andy Mace took the
pole then, for three hours. The water, high and swift, humped itself
over submerged mossy boulders. Andy pushed the loaded canoe up steadily
and at a good pace, with no more show of effort than an ordinary person
would make in cutting tobacco for a pipe. The sun went down before they
reached the Prongs. It was night, with stars in the sky and an aching
cold over everything, when they unlocked the door of Uncle Bill
Tanglers camp.

While Andy lit two fires, one on the open hearth and the other in the
little cook-stove, and shook out blankets to air, Young Dan carried the
outfit up from the landing. Then, by lantern-light and firelight, they
examined the provisions which Bill Tangler had left behind.

Jumpin Josh-ee-phat, look-a here! exclaimed Andy Mace. Heres a box
been bust openbox o prunesand the prunes took. Theres some dried
apples gone, too, and some flour, I reckon. Take a look at the windy,
Young Dan.

The window was shuttered on the outside when the camp was not occupied.
The shutter was of plank, hinged to the window-frame at the top and,
when secured, fastened at the bottom by a hasp and a padlock. But now
the shutter was not fastened. The long staple had been wrenched from the
tough plank and now hung uselessly from the log window-sill, together
with the hasp and padlock.

A bar, said Andy. Trust a bar to sniff out prunes.

A bear wouldnt take flour, said Young Dan.

Ye cant never tell what a bar will do, for bars are natural born
jokers, replied Andy. Ive knowed the critters for nigh onto a hundred
years, and thats my opinion of them.

It wasnt done yesterday, nor even the day before, said the youth.
The prunes hes left in the box are pretty dry. And he has had a go at
the molasses, too. Hes left the stopper out, see; and look at the track
of dried molasses down the front of the jug. Its a wonder he didnt
upset it. And hes ripped the bean-bag open, darn his hide! But how come
it he didnt upset the jug? Maybe it wasnt a bear at all, Mr. Mace. A
man could have done it, I guess.

It be a reglar bar trick, replied Andy. He didnt upset the jug o
molasses, thats trueand Im glad he didntbut all that shows is some
bars is smarter or more careful nor others. He histed the jug in his
two paws and took a swig, thats what he done. Look at the beans hes
chawed and spit out on the floor. Dye reckon a man would do that?

Some men are smarter and more careful than others, replied Young Dan.

They closed the inner glazed sash of the window and nailed a strong bar
of wood across it. Then they cooked and ate their supper and retired to
their bunks, for they were bone-tired. The affair of the thieving bear
would keep very well until morning.

They awoke bright and early. Young Dan hopped from his bunk in a lively
and limber manner, feeling nothing of yesterdays exertions; but Andy
Mace grunted a few times as he sat up in his blankets and a few more
times as he lowered his feet to the floor.

I aint as soupel as I was eighty years ago, he said.

When Young Dan opened the door the cold fairly caught him by the nose.
He made a quick trip across the little clearing and down the steep path
to the landing-place, with two pails in his hands. He found the shallow
Right Prong shelled in black ice from shore to shore save for a few
little air-holes. He had to break the ice with a stone before he could
fill his pails. Then he took a quick and splashy bath right there. Wow!
Wow! But after it he felt as if he could eat his weight in bacon and
pancakes and fight his weight in wild-cats.

They went out and examined the ground beneath the window after
breakfast. Frosts and rains had done much to wipe out the tracks of the
thief, but they found a few unmistakable claw-marks here and there. Mr.
Mace put his white beard to the ground in the intensity of his scrutiny;
but the best he could do was trace the marks for a distance of seven or
eight paces from the window.

I callate hes denned himself up somewheres long before this, and lays
sleepin snug as ye please on a bellyful o Bill Tanglers superior
prunes, he said. Hes a big feller, jedgin by the claws. Id like
fine to happen onto his den.

Same here, replied Young Dan. Id sure like to have a look at him. A
bear as smart as that one ought to be in a circus or teachin school.

They cruised the woods from sunrise to sunset for the next three days,
choosing the likeliest country for their lines of traps. They spent four
more days in setting the traps exactly to Andys taste in four lines of
about equal length radiating from the camp. By that time everything that
wasnt kept indoors or underground, or that wasnt clothed in wool, fur,
or feathers, was frozen stiff. The Right Prong was roofed strongly over,
except in one spot where the swift water kept itself an open
breathing-place in some mysterious way. The ice was strong to the very
edge of that hole; and, to save himself the trouble of keeping another
hole chopped clear, Young Dan always walked out to it for his morning
and evening pails of water. There the little river flashed always bright
and naked and untouched, sliding over mossy rocks as green as in summer.

There were other and lesser streams and half a dozen small ponds within
the circle of Andys and Young Dans operations, and these were all
frozen hard.

Andy arranged the routine of the everyday tasks. They breakfasted before
sunrise, by lantern-light. Then Young Dan set out on one of the crooked
six-mile strings of traps, outfitted with rifle, axe, and frozen bait,
and a pocketful of sandwiches in case of need. Andy cleared away the
breakfast things and fell to the ever-urgent task of rustling wood; and
between bouts of chopping and splitting he prepared the dinner and
sometimes even pulled off such extra stunts as a panful of ginger
cookies or a pie. Young Dan was usually home, with or without a pelt or
two, by half-past twelve or one oclock. After dinner, Andy armed
himself and lit out on another six-mile string, and Young Dan washed the
dinner dishes and rustled wood. Andy was usually back, with luck, in
time to cook supper. In the evening they gave the skins whatever
attention was necessary and the old partner talked and the young one
gave ear. In this way, each of the four lines of traps was visited every
other day.

Snow descended upon that wilderness on the twentieth of November and
continued to descend for two whole days and nights. It came to stay.
Owing to the storm, the partners lost touch with their traps for two
days. The third day was still and clear. The forest was fairly
smothered, aloft and below. Young Dan set out at the first streak of
daylight, sinking deep on his wide snowshoes at every step. He traveled
slowly and experienced a good deal of difficulty in locating some of the
traps. It was noon when he got to the end of the line, empty-handed. He
rested there and ate half of his sandwiches of bread and cold bacon. He
had tramped himself a nest in the snow, and made a little fire of dry
twigs for the appearance of comfort; and now, having eaten, he continued
to sit on his snowshoes and feed the fire. He was about to leave this
retreat and set out on the back-trail when a muffled disturbance of the
snow-heaped brush on his right attracted his attention. He glanced up in
time to see a human figure issue from the tangle, its head held low and
its shoulders hunched against the showers of dislodged snow.

Young Dan was astonished at the sight, but he did nothing to show it.
The intruder shook himself free of snow, halted and stood straight. He
was on snowshoes and carried a rifle in a blanket stocking. Young Dan
noticed that his rough jacket and trousers were old and patched and that
they appeared to be several sizes too large for him.

Have you anything to eat? asked the stranger, in a voice that puzzled
the trapper. If you have, please give me a bite.

Young Dan produced the remaining sandwiches from his pocket and handed
them over without a word. The stranger crouched by the little fire and
bit off a very small corner of frozen bread and frosty bacon.

I was watchin you quite a spell, he said. When I seen you was only a
young feller I wasnt scart.

Only a young feller! exclaimed Young Dan. Is that so? Well, what of
it? You dont look like much of a man yerself.

Which I aint, nor dont pretend to be, replied the stranger,
swallowing hard on the chilly fare. I wisht you had yer teakittle
along. No, I aint much of a man. Im a married woman, with a husband
sick a-bed not five mile from here, an my name is Mrs. May Conleyan
me an Jim Conley an the younguns are jist about starved, if you want
to know. Whereabouts is yer camp from here?

About six mile from this, dead south. I got a partner there, old Andy
Mace; and weve got quite a store of grub, of one kind and
anothercondensed milk, too.

We aint got a cent to buy grub with. Jim was away till a few weeks
back, an then he come home to us without a dollar of his summer wages
an went sick.

Thatll be all right about the money; but what ails yer husband?

Mrs. Conleys answer to that was a cheerless smile and a shake of the
head.

I suppose you shoot fresh meat, anyhow, continued Young Dan, feeling
embarrassed. You got a rifle, I see.

If you mean deer an the like by fresh meat, then I tell you I dont
shoot itbut Ive shot at it a few times, replied the woman. Its a
sight too knowing an lively for me to hit.

Tell you what Ill do, mam, said Young Dan. You come to this very
spot at ten oclock to-morrow and youll find me here with some grub.
Will tea and canned milk and sugar and fifteen pounds of white flour be
any use to you?

Will spring water quench thirst? returned the woman, her sad face
brightening. But cant I have it sooner?some of that there milk,
anyhow? Young man, my two babies was cryin with hungry pains when I
started out; an the biggest of em isnt as long as this here
snowshoe.

If I had it here Id give it you right nowbut all our grubs back at
our camp, six mile away. Will you go along with me and carry away what
youre in most need of, mam?

Will a duck swim?

Young Dan meant well, but he did not realize that the mother of two
children who cry with hunger is almost sure to be weak for want of
foodhe did not realize it until he heard a soft thud behind him and
turned to find his companion flat on her face in the snow. He raised her
to a sitting position and pulled her back until she rested against a
small spruce. He built a big fire in the trail and cut many fir boughs
to serve her as a couch and covering. He removed her snowshoes.

Guess Im all intill I have a cup of tea, she said.

Ill fetch a kettle, replied Young Dan. You stop right there till I
get back.

He made the remaining three miles to the camp on Right Prong in record
time. He told what he knew of Mrs. Conleys story briefly to Andy, while
they made up a small pack of provisions in a blanket. He attached a
small frying-pan and a kettle to the pack.

Best go all the way home with her, if ye aint clean tuckered out,
said the old man. I callate it wouldnt be a bad idee to have a look
at this here Jim Conley, for he dont sound to me like a desirable
neighbor nor a valued citizen. You kin size him up while yer restin,
and take yer time on the home-trip. It shapes for a fine night.

Ill do that, said Young Dan.

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER IV

                          THE MAN IN THE BUNK


The sun was on the edge of the western hills when he got back to Mrs.
Conley. She expressed relief at seeing him and wonder at seeing him so
soon. He built up the fire, melted snow and made tea. He also fried a
little bacon and bread. Between them they emptied tea-kettle and
frying-pan; and the woman was greatly revived by the food and drink.

The woman led the way northward and westward to her home. The distance
struck Young Dan as being nearer seven miles than five. The small window
of the cabin glowed a dim yellow. Mrs. Conley pushed open the door and
entered without waiting to remove her snowshoes. Young Dan kicked off
his snowshoes and had a foot on the threshold when he heard an
unpleasant voice shout from somewhere within, demanding to know where
the woman had been and why she had stayed away so long and why she
hadnt brought some food home with her. A few oaths gave color to the
questions.

Young Dan crossed the threshold, kicked the door shut with a heel and
lowered his pack to the floor. In one comprehensive glance he saw the
woman stooped to two clinging children, a man lying in a bunk, a failing
fire on a rough hearth, a smoky lantern on a table and a worn bear-skin
on the floor. He had never seen a less cheering interior.

The man in the bunk sat up and stared at Young Dan. His shoulders looked
very broad in the dim light.

Whos thar? he exclaimed. Whos that?

Ye neednt be scart, said the woman, with a tang of scorn in her
voice. Its a feller from the camp over on Right Prong. Hes fetched in
some grub for us, in the kindness of his heart.

The man immediately lay back without another word.

Young Dan felt indignant, so much so that his indignation amounted to
angeranger that felt like a lump of something uncomfortably hard and
hot in his chest. He wanted to say something sharp to the big fellow in
the bunkbut he didnt know what to say. So, without a word, he untied
his blanket, filled an arm with the packages of food and carried all to
the table.

No water and no wood, said Mrs. Conley, looking at the bunk.

Young Dan went outside and found a small pile of wood beside the door,
under a roof of snow. He carried an armful into the shack; and as he
laid the sticks beside the hearth he noticed how irregularly and
unskilfully the severed ends were cut. Even a sick man accustomed to the
use of an axe would not have hacked the wood so clumsily. He knew it was
not the work of the man in the bunk. He then took up an empty pail and
enquired the whereabouts of the water-hole. Mrs. Conley told him that
there was a spring just back of the shack and a path leading to it which
he couldnt miss. She was right; and in a minute he was back with the
water. As he set the pail down on a bench near the door he looked at the
man in the bunk, the hot spot of anger and indignation still glowing in
his chest. The mans eyes met his for a momentbut he saw more than the
fellows eyes. He crossed the narrow floor to the bunk.

Whats the matter with you, anyhow? he asked.

Matter with me, dye say? returned the fellow in the blankets. Im
sick, thats whats the matter. Cant ye see?

Young Dan stooped swiftly and drew a high-shouldered, square-faced black
bottle from beneath the edge of the bunk. There was a sound of clinking
glass as he brought it forth as if it were in contact with receptacles
of a like nature and material. He held it aloft.

Yes, I can see all right, he cried. And I guess Ive got hold of a
few doses of your medicine.

Well, what of it? demanded the other, his voice at once savage and
anxious.

Young Dan returned the bottle to its place; and in so doing he caught
sight of some other articles of interest beneath the bunk. More bottles
were there, both full and emptybut there were other things of even
greater interest to the youth. He stood up, however, without word or
sign of comment.

Mrs. Conley, who was busily engaged in feeding the children with
condensed milk diluted with hot water, paid keen attention to Young
Dans words and actions, but said nothing.

Young Dan moved away from the bunk and bestowed a brief but enquiring
glance upon the worn bear-skin on the floor. That article had struck him
as looking queer, somehow or other, when he had first set eyes on it;
and now he knew it to be queer. It had grown on a big animal and had
evidently been a fine pelt in its day. The big, wide head was therenot
the skull, but the complete skin of head, to the tip of the nose. Yes,
the head was all therebut all four paws were missing!

Young Dan turned again to the man in the bunk. Say the word, and Ill
get a doctor in to see you, he said. Or well haul you out on a sled,
if you aint too sick to be shifted about a bit.

I dont want no cussed doctor pisonin me, cried the invalid. Mind
yer own business, will ye, an leave me be to look after mine? Im able
for it, without yer help.

All right, retorted Young Dan, his voice shaking with anger and scorn.
Well, then, look after yer own business if youre so able. Get out of
bed and get to work. I know all I need to about you. I know enough about
you to run you out of these woods and into jail; and thats the
identical thing I intend to do if you dont get busy. So cut out the gin
and the bunk and cut into the wood-pile. Dye get me?

The man did not answer. The woman continued to feed the children in
silence. Young Dan glared at the bunk a little longer, then fetched his
snowshoes and put them on, and took up his rifle, axe and blanket.

Im off, he said. But Ill be back in a few days, to see how youre
working, Jim Conley. Ive got your measure, and dont you forget it!
Goodnight to you, mam.

He had not gone far from the miserable cabin before the woman came
running after him. He halted.

What is it ye know about him? she asked, anxiously.

I can guess moren I know, but I reckon what I know is plenty, he
replied. He broke into my Uncle Bill Tanglers camp a few months back
an stole some grub, with the paws an claws of a big bear on his hands
an feet. Guess he reckoned he was smart.

How dye know that?

Id figgered out it wasnt a bear long ago; and to-night I spied the
skinned paws under the bunk. It was easy.

Jim wasnt in the woods when that happened, she whispered. It was me
broke into the camp an stole the grub. It was me who cut the paws off
that old skin an used em to fool ye with. Jim was away out to the
settlements that day.

You, maam!

Thats Gospel-true. The babies and me hadnt a bite to eat but some
rusty pork. We needed the food bad. It was the first time I ever stole
anything.

Then why didnt you upset the molasses jug, like a bear would do? A
bear would of upset it an then licked the molasses off the floor. If
youd done it that way, mamupset the jug, I meanI wouldnt of
suspicioned the thief wasnt a bear; and so I wouldnt of examined the
shutter and spotted how the staple had been pried off with the blade of
an axe; and so I wouldnt of taken any stock in the old paws under the
bunk.

I took enough molasses to fill the bottle I had along with me. I hadnt
the heart to upset the jug an waste what I didnt want. But I kinder
thought thats what a bear would do.

Well, thats all right, anyhow, said Young Dan. I dont blame you a
mite for rustlin grub for your babies; but if you dont make that big
bluffer get to work, Ill land him in jail or bust tryinand you can
bet I wont bust, mam!

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER V

                             THE STIFF KNEE


Well, I found that bear, said Young Dan Evans to Andy when he arrived
at the camp; and then he gave a full account of his experiences with the
Conley family.

You done dead right! exclaimed Andy Mace, at the conclusion of the
story. You got brains and use em, I do believe; and thats moren can
be said about most folks nowadays. What size was this here Jim Conley?

Big. Over six foot high, I guess, and heftyand no more sick-abed nor
you or me.

What would yeve done if hed clum outer the bunk an lammed ye one?

Id of lammed him two or three backmaybe four.

I reckon ye would. I was jist sich another at yer age, Young Danalways
up an doin, always ready to fight my own weight in minks or men, and
yet always a thinker an a bit of scholard, too.

But I dont go round looking for fights, Mr. Mace. Im peaceable enough
by nature.

Yes, in course. Its the same with me. There never was a more peaceable
citizen on the Oxbow nor Andy Macebut nobody had to tromp on the tails
o my snowshoes moren twice to fetch me round with fists in both
hands.

A week passed before the partners on Right Prong heard or saw anything
more of the Conleys. It was a busy week with them, for trails had to be
beaten out anew in the deep snow and a fresh supply of bait had to be
obtained for the traps; and, as if these tasks were not enough, Andy
shot a fat buck deer which had to be skinned and quartered and placed
out of harms way, and Young Dan cracked the frame of one of his
snowshoes. The partners were full of energy and determination, however.
They survived that strenuous week breathless but triumphant. They
obtained the required bait from the depths of a nameless pond which lay
four miles to the eastward of the camp. This was a big job in itself,
for the ice was nearly two feet thick on the pond, not to mention the
three feet of snow which topped the ice. They shovelled snow; then they
chopped and shovelled ice; and at last old Andy bored with a four-inch
bit until the clear water welled up into the icy trough from the brown
depths. He bored two holes; and then they baited their hooks with fat of
pork and each lowered a line into the unknown. They fished steadily for
three hours and by the end of that time were too nearly frozen to go on
with it. The captured trout froze stiff after a jump or two on the snow.

Reckon its a reel chilly day, remarked Andy, looking from the low
sun, which glinted as grey and cheerless as a flake of ice, to the
frozen fish. Reckon wed best quit and git home before were as stiff
an twisted as these here trout.

He was right. If there had been a thermometer in the Right Prong country
it would have marked twenty-five degrees below zero just then. Young Dan
was agreeable; but he would have stood there and continued the motions
of fishing, slowly and more slowly until the numbness caught his heart,
if the old man had not suggested a move. When two good men go into the
woods together, and one of them is well past four score years of age and
the other has not yet completed his first score, the spur of competition
is bound to prod now and then. In this matter of endurance against the
cold the partners had silently and almost unconsciously competed. No
rivalry of youth and age had inspired them, but rather the rivalry of
two widely separated generations of youth; for old Andy Mace considered
himself as good a man as he had ever been and so a trifle better than
Young Dan, maybe, because of his birth and training in a period of the
worlds existence that had marked its very highest point of development.
He said nothing of all this to Young Dan, of courseeven if he thought
it.

They gathered up their gear and scooped the frozen fish into a couple of
sacks. Not a word did they exchange until they were both on the warm
side of their own door; and even then they didnt exchange many. An hour
later, however, when the riz biscuits, broiled venison steak, and the
coffee-pot were on the table, they talked good and plenty.

Woodsmen are not generally supposed to be talkative folk. If there is
any truth in this general supposition, then Young Dan and old Andy Mace
must be the two exceptions that prove itif suppositions, like rules,
can be proved by exceptions. However that may be, these two woodsmen
spent every evening in conversation, crawling into their bunks at last
only because they couldnt hear in their sleep. And their talk was not
all of the woods and the days work. Far from it. They had much more to
say concerning what they thought than what they knew; and so almost
every subject under the sun was dealt with. Even when Young Dan read
aloud, Andy capped every paragraph with a comment or an explanation, or
an objection of equal or greater length. Their library contained only
three small volumes of fiction, all from one entertaining penbut under
their system of reading, three promised to be plenty, for one winter at
least. In spite of his interruptions, Andy Mace was a hungry listener,
and so his interest in the adventures and mental processes of Mr.
Sherlock Holmes soon became almost as keen as his partners. No one
could be more sharply intrigued by an artful combination of significant
words than that old trapper.

On the night of the day of the cold fishing, after the last fragment of
steak had been devoured, Young Dan opened one of the treasured books and
began to read aloud; and, at the same moment, Andy began to cut tobacco
for his pipe. Andy gave ear intently until the tobacco was shredded,
rolled, stuffed into the pipe and satisfactorily lighted. He blew three
large, slow clouds and settled back in his chair.

I wisht we had that gent here on Right Prong with us, he said. Hed
stand it all right, too, I reckon, in a good coonskin coat. What dye
callate hed of made o that thief in claws?

Young Dan closed the book on a finger.

I guess he would of known it wasnt a bear right off, he said. I did.
I suspicioned it wasnt, anyhow. I guess he would of known for sure,
right off; and maybe he wouldnt of figgered it out the way I did,
neithernot by the molasses jug alone, perhaps.

How else could he figger it out? What else was there to figger on?

Plenty for him. I can think of some other things myself, now. There
were the claw-marks. I guess those alone would of been enough for Mr.
Holmes.

What about em? They were marks of a bars claws.

Yesbut hes scientifical, Mr. Holmes is. He would of had a spyin
glass handy in his pocket to look at the marks with, and right off hed
of seen by the spread from claw to claw that they had been made by a
mighty big bear. He would study over that a few minutes, somethin like
this: A bear with paws as big as what these must of been must be an
uncommon big bear; and heavyfour or five hundred pounds in weight,
maybe, in the fall of the year; and so he would just naturally make
deeper tracks than these here; and a bear as big as what he must be to
own these paws and claws would be too darned big to get through that
little window without spreadin the side of the camp or bustin himself
or somethin. So he would up and say, quick but quiet, This thief is a
lamb in a wolfs clothesor somethin like that. He would know it
wasnt a bear, anyway. Thats how Mr. Holmes would of figgered it out, I
guess.

Andy withdrew his pipe from his mouth and slowly straightened himself in
his chair.

Sufferin cats! he exclaimed. It dont sound altogether human comin
like that from a young feller who aint been to school nowhere but down
to the Bend. Whered ye get the trick of it from, Young Dan? Not from
yer Pa nor yer Ma, Ill swear an Alfy Davy!

That was easy, workin it out after I knew, the way I did, replied
Young Dan, modestly. If I had worked it out that way before I
knewwell, that would of been pretty slick work. That would of been
scientifical.

If Goverment hears about it youll be one o these here boss policemen
some day, said Andy.

I guess not, retorted Young Dan, with a slight curl of the lips that
was foreign to his character.

He already shared Sherlock Holmes opinion of the mental equipment of
that stalwart and imperturbable force.

He reopened the book and took up the story at the point of his partners
interruption. He read a paragraph, his voice skidding now and then on a
word of formidable proportions. He read a page, warming to his work and
tearing the big words to pieces without so much as a hitch in his
stride. Two pagesand still not a peep out of Andy Mace. He ceased
reading and looked up inquiringly, and beheld his aged partner slouched
in the chair and sunk deep in slumber, his shoulders hunched high, his
chin tucked in and his grey beard rising and falling peacefully on his
breast.

Young Dan was up as early as usual next morning. He lit the lantern and
then the fire in the stove; and it was not until then that he heard any
signs of life from his partners bunk.

Sufferin cant-dogs! exclaimed Andy. Warm up the bars grease for
me, pardner. This here right leg o mines stiffern King Pharaohs
neck. Must of give it a twist yesterday.

Young Dan complied with this request, cooked the breakfast and tucked
into it. He set out on the northward line at the first break of dawn,
with a sack over his shoulder containing a supply of the new bait and a
haunch of venison, leaving Andy Mace still rubbing that high-smelling
cure-all into his right knee and telling how it had been tender ever
since he had hurt it fifty years ago in an argument with a man from
Quebec.

It was a fine morning, and a clear finger of light in the east promised
a fine day. The air was still and not so perishing cold as it had been
the day before. Young Dan traveled fast. He found a mink in the first
trap and stowed it away in the sack without waiting to skin it. He
rebaited the trap with a frozen trout. The second and third traps were
exactly as he had last seen them; the fourth contained a red fox, which
he added to the collection in the sack; and the remaining traps were
undisturbed. He continued northward along the trail that led to the
Conley cabin.

Young Dan did not find Jim Conley at home, but Mrs. Conley and the
babies were there. He produced the haunch of deer-meat, for which the
woman thanked him heartily.

Im glad to see that Jims able to be up and out, he said. He must be
feeling better.

I reckon hes some better, she replied. He lit out for the
settlements two days back, anyhow.

To fetch in some grub?

Maybe hell fetch in some grub.

Young Dans eyes turned significantly to the floor at the edge of the
bunk beneath which he had discovered the store of square-faces during
his last visit. The woman observed the glance and sighed. Young Dan felt
embarrassed.

Im glad he has something to buy grub with, he said.

Hes got a few skins, said the woman. He went out an set some traps
first thing after the tongue-lashin ye give him.

He must be lucky, to have enough to carry out to the settlements after
a couple of days trapping, said the youth, astonished.

Mrs. Conley smiled bitterly.

Jim dont wait to git a lot before he commences sellin, she said.
Its the way hes built.

And hes left you to attend to the traps?

Nope, he told me to let em be while he was gone. I dont know nothin
about traps, anyhow. I was born and riz in the settlements.

He might lose some good skins that wayhave them et up on him; but its
his own business, I guess. Well, I must be getting home. If you need
anything, mam, you know where to find my partner and me.

Young Dan sat down and ate his lunch as soon as he got out of sight of
the cabin. He felt depressed; and the cold steak and frosty biscuits
didnt cheer him.

Thats a poor outfit, he said. I guess that Jim Conleys no darned
good. I wonder where he got that ginand if hell get any more? He wont
buy much with the price of a few fox skins, thats sure. Hes big, and
maybe hes powerfulbut I kind of feel that Ill light right into him
next time I see him.

He made the homeward journey of twelve miles without a stop. It was
close to three oclock in the afternoon when he reached camp; and there,
to his astonishment, he found Andy Mace seated by the stove with his
right leg cocked up in a chair.

Andy looked ashamed of himself.

I never knowed it to act so contrary before, he said. Its still
stiffern a ramrod, an Ive rubbed nigh all my bars grease into it;
an all the fault o that gum-heeled feller from Quebec I fit with over
on the Tobique in the winter o eighteen-seventy. Its nigh enough to
rile a mans temper, Young Dan.

Young Dan was distressed.

If it hurts you bad, just say the word and Ill go clean out to Harlow
and fetch in a doctor, he offered.

No! exclaimed Andy. It aint my knee hurts me, but its layin down
on the job to-day, and maybe to-morrow, and leavin all the work to you.
Thats what riles me.

Dont you worry about that, the youth reassured him. I am able and
willing, and youll be right as rain in a few days. Now Ill do a mile
or two of the south line and be back in time to fry pancakes for
supper.

He was as good as his word; and, later, his pancakes proved to be as
good as any his partner had ever mixed and fried. He told of his visit
to the Conley cabin, and the old man agreed with him that it would be a
real pleasure to hand Jim Conley just what he deserved. After supper,
Young Dan read a complete story, in irregular fragments, and his partner
talked a bookful.

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER VI

                             FISH FOR BAIT


Andys knee was worse next morning, but he did not say so. He admitted
that it didnt seem to be any more supple, spoke hopefully of another
days rest and a little more bears grease as being all that it
required, and again referred to the fight of fifty years ago in terms of
regret and acrimony. The truth was that the old fellow had rheumatism;
and he knew what it was; and he had felt it before, once or twice a
year, in the very same place. Furthermore, the gritty old sportsman was
too vain to admit the truth. Of course he had fought with a man from
Quebec fifty years ago, in a lumber-camp on Tobique River, and twisted a
knee in the heat of the encounterbut if you had put him on oath and
asked him to lay a finger on the knee he had wrenched on that distant
occasion, he couldnt have done it.

I hope you walloped that man from Quebec, said Young Dan.

I sure did, replied Andy, brightening. He was counted a smart fighter
even for them daysbut I was the snag he busted himself on.

I betcher! Well, Ill be back in time to cook dinner, so you just keep
quiet while Im gone.

No, you take yer grub along and Ill have supper ready when you git
back. I aint a cripple yet.

Young Dan put some food in his pockets and went about his days work,
armed as usual with axe and rifle. He set out on the line of traps that
ran crookedly almost due west, for this was the one that had been
longest neglected. Andy Mace had been along it last, just before the
forty-eight-hour storm, and now the tracks of his snowshoes were buried
deep. Young Dan kept to his course without difficulty, however, though
the line was not blazed. He worked easily by signs that would have meant
nothing to a city man. His guides were certain trees and bushes and
humps and hollows; and the wilderness was full to crowding of such
things. So much for the line of general directionbut some of the traps
lay several score of yards to the right and left of that line. A modest
blaze had been cut in the bark of tree or sapling at several of these
points of deflection.

Young Dan drew two blanks and then a fine big lynx. He skinned the lynx
before going on. The fourth trap was empty, but the bait which had been
placed on and around it so artfully had been snatched away even more
artfully. He rebaited with frozen trout. The fifth trap was snapped
tight on the forepaws of a skunk. The skunk itself was gone but Young
Dan soon discovered odds and ends of hair and bone scattered in the snow
in the immediate vicinity. Something with an amazing appetite had beaten
the trapper to that trap, for certain. Young Dan set these things to
rights and passed on, wondering at the driving power of hunger.

Two more blanks, a red fox and a skunk followed. The last trap on the
line was empty and evidently undisturbed. The bait was covered with
snow. Young Dan felt for it with a small stick and twitched a bit of it
to the surface. He replaced it with a frozen trout, left it lying on the
snow as an extra lure and turned away. He even took a step away; and
then he turned back sharply and with the stick drew closer the piece of
bait which he had twitched out of the snow. He took it up in his
mittened hands and examined it closely. His eyes rounded and his lips
parted with astonishment. Then his face took on an expression of blank
bewilderment. He gazed all around at the crowding underbrush and soaring
spires of the forest, then straight up at the clear sky, then down again
at the lump of frozen bait in his hand.

Thats queer, he said. Andy was here last, and that was before we
went fishingyes, and before the last snow. We were baiting with
porcupine that day. I wonder where he got this from.

He tossed the thing back into the snow and, still wondering, went his
way. His way now was not by the back trail, but sharp to the right, and
then more to the right, until his course lay southeast. He traveled by
the sun. The way was rough and tangled, and the going was heavy. He
struggled over blow-downs and through cedar-twined fastnesses of swamp.
After a couple of miles of it he sat down to rest and eat his lunch.
After that he came to a patch of open barren, desolate and flat under
the colorless sun. He held to his course straight across the level, a
distance of about two miles, and made good time. Beyond the barren he
entered a forest of big timber and crossed a wide ridge of maples and
yellow birches; and far beyond the ridge he came at last to the locality
of the southernmost trap of the southern line.

Young Dan had traveled close upon fifteen miles since breakfast, and
here he was still six miles at least from camp as the crow fliesand
what would have been a laughing matter to a crow was a tough job for
him. He almost found it in his heart to hope that all the traps between
him and his supper were empty. No such luck! In that first trap, the
farthest from home, he found a big bobcata cheap pelt on a big body.

It was past eight oclock when Young Dan pushed open the door, staggered
into the camp and let his load thump to the floor. He dropped his axe,
too, stood his rifle against the wall, threw aside his fur cap and
mittens, and sank into a chair with a grunt of relief.

That _was_ a days work, and Im darn glad its through with! he
exclaimed, leaning back in his chair and closing his eyes.

Andy Mace didnt say a word.

Young Dan sat up and looked all around. He saw the glow of the fire in
the rusty stove, red embers on the hearth, and the lighted lantern at
the little window, hooked to a nail in the frame. The room was poorly
illuminated. Most of it, including Andy Maces bunk, was in deep shadow.

Hes taking a nap, reflected Young Dan. I guess his knee hurts him
moren he lets on, and maybe it kept him awake last night.

He hunched forward and untied the frozen thongs of his snowshoes very
quietly, fearful of disturbing the sleeper. Stealthily he put a few
sticks of wood in the stove and a log on the red embers in the chimney.
Next, he pussy-footed over to the window and unhooked the lantern and
set it down on the table near the stove. He felt bone-tired and sleepy,
but his spirit was untouched by fatigue. Recalling Andys statement
concerning supper, he decided to cook something goodsomething
elaborate, like buckwheat pancakes or baconand boil a big pot of
coffee, without waking the sluggard. He would even go so far as to tuck
into the grub before arousing the sleeper by clattering a spoon against
the coffee-pot. It would be a good joke on the old boy.

Owing to the changed position of the lantern, Andy Maces bunk was now
free from shadow. Young Dan glanced at it and instantly forgot the
contemplated joke. The bunk was empty!

Young Dan felt a sharp sense of unreality, as daunting as it was new to
himbut in a moment the chill of that gave way before a surge of
anxiety. He searched through the camp in a minute, all his weariness
forgotten. Andy Mace was nowhere indoors; his snowshoes were gone, too;
but his rifle leaned in its usual corner, in its old canvas case. Young
Dan began to dress for the open with both hands and both feet. His coat,
cap, mittens and snowshoes all seemed to fall into position and attach
themselves at once. He took up the lantern and his rifle and went out,
pulling the door shut behind him.

Young Dan found his partners tracks in fifteen seconds. They did not
lead along any one of the four lines of traps. They told him, as plain
as print, that the old mans right leg was still as stiff as a ramrod.
Why Andy had gone into the woods at such an hour, lame or limber, was
more than he could even begin to imagine. He reckoned the time of Andys
departure from the camp by the condition of the fire in the stove at the
time of his return. He put it at something between an hour and a half
and two hours.

He followed the trail in feverish haste for a hundred yards or so, then
halted and shouted his partners name at the top of his voice. A faint
shout came back to him. He yelled again and continued his advance,
holding the lantern high and struggling in the snow-choked underbrush
like a swimmer in heavy surf. He reflected that Andy had certainly taken
a bee-line for wherever he was bound, regardless of natural obstacles.
In his care to keep the lantern from contact with the snow he stumbled
heavily several times and at last fell flat. The thick, hot glass of the
lantern cracked like a pistol-shot and fell apart as it plunged into the
snow, and the flame sizzled to extinction.

Young Dan arose to his knees slowly and in silence, with his rifle in
one hand and the ring of the chimneyless lantern in the other. In
silence he struggled to his feet and reset his right snowshoe. Whats
the use of talking when you know that the words required by your
emotions dont exist? Still in silence, he cleared his eyes and neck of
snow. Then, to his great relief, he saw a yellow glow of fire-light far
away beyond the tangled screens of the forest. He went straight for the
light with as much noise and almost as much speed as a bull moose in a
hurry. He bored ahead, shielding his face with the cased rifle and
battered lantern, and letting his feet look after themselves. He
frequently snarled his snowshoes in the brush and took a header, but he
was never down for more than five seconds at a time.

Young Dan found the distance between the fire and the place of his first
tumble to be considerably less than he had feared. The fire burned in
the center of a tiny dell; and beside it, on a mat of spruce boughs, sat
Andy Mace.

Whats the matter with you? cried Young Dan. What are you doing
hereand why didnt you stay home like you said you would?

Im glad you come, said the old man. I callated thats what yed do.
Well, I dont blame ye a mite for feelin riled, Young Dan. But what
else could I do?

What do you mean? You could have stopped home!

I clean forgot to tell ye. Look whats layin tother side the fire,
Young Dan. So what else could I do but turn out an hunt about, when I
heard him shootin off his rifle like a battle. And I thought all along
it was yerself, until I found him.

Young Dan stumbled around the fire and saw what the smoke had veiled
from hima big man lying prone on a blanket, flat on his back, with a
lumpy sack partially sunk in the snow near his head. His snowshoes, axe
and uncased rifle stood upright in a row several paces distant from the
fire.

What else was I to do? asked Andy Mace. And when I come up on him an
seen it wasnt you I couldnt leave him to perish, could I now?

Its Jim Conley, said Young Dan. Whats the matter with him?

Jim Conley, hey? Thats what I suspicioned. Well, pardner, hes got
more troubles nor one the matter with him; an what laid him there on
his back the way ye see him now was a clout over the head I handed him
with the butt o his own rifle.

The youths bewilderment increased.

Did you kill him? he asked, in awe-stricken tones.

I reckon not, replied Andy, casually. Hes alivein his own way.

Young Dan chopped more brush for the fire and heaped it on, then removed
his snowshoes and reclined beside his partner.

Andy Mace filled and lit his pipe and told his story. He had sat quiet
all day and rubbed the last of the bears grease into his stiff knee. He
had fallen asleep along about mid-afternoon and slept soundly for hours.
Waking suddenly, for no particular reason that he knew of, he had found
the camp in darkness except for the glow of the fallen fire on the
hearth. He had built up the fires in a hurry and lighted the lantern;
and he had just opened the door for a look at the weather, before
concentrating his mind on the preparation of supper, when he heard a
rifle shot. That shot had been followed quickly by three more. He had
hung the lantern in the window then and scrambled into his outdoor
things and hobbled off at the best pace he could manage, feeling quite
sure that the shots were calls from Young Dan for help. Another had
sounded before the door was shut behind him, and yet another before he
had gone fifty yards into the woods. He had bored straight ahead, slap
through everything except the actual trunks of the big trees, taking the
rough with the smooth and the hard with the softand just how many times
he had plunged into the snow with his face and swept it up with his
whiskers hed hate to try to remember. His ears had been plugged with
snow most of the time, anyhow, and his stiff knee had received some
violent shocks, but he had kept going, and after a while he had heard
someone yelling. He had gone ahead more circumspectly after that,
knowing that the voice did not belong to his partner; and before long he
had found Jim Conley trying to light a fire and making a poor job of it.

Why couldnt he light it? asked Young Dan.

Well, every time hed get it lit hed fall down slam on top o the
little flame an smother it out.

Was he that near froze?

Thats what I suspicioned, so I drug him off an sot him down an lit
the bit o brush an bark for him. I cut some dead stuff, an some
chunks o green wood, an built up a good fire; then I looked round an
seen him settin back as comfortable as you please sucking away at a
square-face. That riled me, Young Dan. That would rile a more peaceable
man nor meto see him draggin at that there bottle, an it moren
three-quarters empty alreadyan considerin how Id nigh busted my leg
off to find him, thinkin it was yerself shootin an hollerin. Yes, I
reckon even a deacon would of felt kinder sore. So I went up to him an
grabbed the bottle an hove it away an bust it agin a tree; an up he
come, sprys a cat, an lammed me one on the shoulder that laid me flat;
but up I come on one leg, quickern a wink, an finished him. I looked
into his packan then I wisht Id hit him harder.

Why? Whats in the bag?

Considerable baccy, and a pound o tea, an maybe as much as a whole
pound o bacon, and a box o seegars, and a bran new razor an strop,
an some catridges, and a red weskit, an four more square-faces o
gin. Thats whats in his pack!

Young Dan continued to recline on an elbow and stare at the fire between
half-closed lids in silence for several minutes.

I was just thinking he must of had great luck with his few traps,
considering he didnt set them out till after that night I saw him, he
said, at last.

Why was ye thinkin that? asked Andy.

Well, hed have to pay a lot for the gin, wouldnt he, for the man who
sold it to him was risking being sent to jail, wasnt he? He had as many
as six bottles when he started for home, or he wouldnt have four now;
and I betcher it cost him as much as eight or ten dollars a bottle. He
must of had great luck with his trapsin the two days they were set.

I reckon he must of, Young Dan. Whats on yer mind, anyhow?

Jim Conleys luck, thats what.

He must of caught somethin special, thats a fact.

What did you bait with last time you tended the west line?

The west line? Lemme think. That was the day before the big snow. I
baited with porcupine.

Its baited with fish to-day.

Sure it be. What o that, Young Dan?

I mean it was already baited with fish when I got to it. I mean that
someone had rebaited itand reset it, too, I guesssince your last
visit.

You dont say! Someone at our traps! Lets make a try at gittin home,
pardner. I be that danged hungry an oncomfortable my brains wont
think.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER VII

                           THE ONE-EYED INJUN


The partners aroused Jim Conley, who grumbled savagely at being
disturbed.

Were going, anyhow, said Young Dan, upon seeing that the fellow had
not suffered seriously by Andy Maces method of persuasion.

Stop here all night, if you want toand freeze to death! Youre old
enough an ugly enough to look after yerself.

Conley sat up at that and violently demanded immediate information
concerning his whereabouts.

Youre in the woods, replied Young Dan. In the woods, where youd be
froze stiff in the snow by now, but for Andy Mace.

Conley got slowly to his feet.

Thats rightlost in the woods, he said, in a flat voice. I call it
to mind now. Kinder lost my way, I reckon.

He put on his snowshoes with fumbling hands, breathing heavily and
muttering to himself the while.

Ill tote this along for you, said Young Dan, laying a hand on the
lumpy sack.

The other snatched it from him and shouldered it.

Guess I kin carry that myself! he exclaimed.

Young Dan went in front, sensing the way in the dark. Andy went next,
making heavy weather of it with his stiff leg. Jim Conley brought up the
rear, plunging and grumbling and frequently falling. They reached the
camp at last. Young Dan left the door open behind him and went straight
to the hearth and stove and fed both with fuel. Andy Mace, exhausted by
his stiff-legged efforts and the pain of them, sank to the floor and lay
flat as soon as he had crossed the threshold. Then Jim Conley floundered
hurriedly and unsteadily from the cold outer gloom into the warm inner
darkness, sack on shoulder. He tripped over Andys prostrate form and
pitched forward to his hands and knees, and the lumpy sack hurtled from
his shoulder and struck the floor with a smashing crash.

Young Dan threw a roll of birch bark on the open fire, and in a few
seconds the camp was luridly illuminated; and then he saw his partner
and Conley on the floor, Andy sitting bolt-upright and the latter facing
him on all-fours, glaring in rage and astonishment at each other; and
beyond them he saw the lumpy sack squashed to half its former bulk and
leaking puddles of gin. The sight was too much for his sense of humor,
tired and hungry though he was. He laughed until tears melted the ice on
his eyelashes and his knees sagged beneath him. He sat down weakly on a
convenient chair and continued to laugh helplessly until sudden and
violent action on the floor recalled him to a more serious aspect of the
affair. Conley had grabbed Andy Mace by the beard with his left hand and
by the windpipe with his right, at the same time flinging his whole
weight forward; and the old woodsman had smashed in two life-sized
wallops on the sides of Conleys head, one with his right fist and one
with his left, even as he sank beneath the younger mans hands.

Young Dan jumped to the struggle. His snowshoes were still on his feet.
He gripped Conley with both hands by the neck of his several coats and
shirts, wrenched him clear of Andy and thumped him violently on the
floor, face-downward.

Quit it! cried Conley. Lemme be, cantcher!

Young Dan left him without a word and shut the door. He removed his
snowshoes then, and his cap and outer coat, lit the wick of the lantern
and placed a new chimney in the battered frame.

Reckon Ill stop right here till I git my supper, said Andy Mace from
the floor.

Jim Conley turned over on his back, but did not attempt to rise.

Young Dan collected rifles and axes from the floor and stood them in a
corner, set a big frying-pan on the stove and filled the kettle from a
pail by the doorall in a grim silence. After slicing venison into the
pan, along with some fat bacon, he removed his partners snowshoes and
brushed him off with a broom.

Is everything busted in that there sack? inquired Conley, anxiously,
raising himself slowly on an elbow.

Young Dan untied the sack and shook its contents out onto the floor.
There were fragments of four square-faced black bottles. The other
articles, the bacon and tea and tobacco, were saturated with gin. Young
Dan pushed the mess together with his foot, in scornful silence.

Thats sure a grand outfit o grub to take home to a woman an two
childern, remarked Andy Mace.

Jim Conley swore long and loud and strong.

Shut up! snapped Young Dan.

Someun will pay for that! cried Conley. Good an plenty.

Young Dan stepped forward and stooped down and stared into the eyes of
his unwelcome guest.

I warn you, Jim Conley, to mend your ways an mind your manners, or
youll find yourself crowded for elbow-room in this neck o woods, he
said, slowly and clearly. And I warn you that it wont be me wholl
have to clear out when the crowding commences. Think it over; and the
less you say about your spilt gin and whos to pay for itand who has
already paid for itthe better for you.

Whats that ye say? returned the other, trying unsuccessfully to keep
his eyes steady and his voice big and careless.

It was a warning.

About who paid for the ginthats what Im askin ye. What dye mean by
that? Thats what I want to know, young feller.

You know what I mean by that; so keep your mouth shut, or Ill forget
about your family and light right into you.

Conley laughed uneasily and dropped the subject.

If yer askin me to stop to supper, Ill take off my snowshoes an
mitts, he said.

Well feed you, now that weve saved you from freezing to death in the
snow, replied Young Dan, ungraciously, returning to the stove.

Two pots of tea were drunk and two pans of venison steak were devoured.
Then the partners crawled into their bunks and their guest went to sleep
on the floor.

Jim Conley departed after breakfast next morning, with his reduced,
high-flavored sack on his shoulder and a reflective and uneasy
expression in his close-set eyes. The partners were glad to be rid of
him. They discussed him at considerable length. You scared him, said
Andybut Im thinkin ye maybe said a mite too much about who paid for
the licker. He dont look overly smart, but I reckon theres somethin
inside his skull, even if its only porridge; an yer warnin was strong
enough to start porridge a-bubblin. We aint got anythin on him the
law kin touch him for, fars I kin see. It wasnt him robbed the camp,
an we cant swear he was at our traps. You hadnt ought to give yer
suspicions away like that, Young Dan.

Maybe yer right, said Young Dan. I sure did talk kind of out-an-out.
But what of it? I want to warn him, because hes got to feed his wife
and kids. If he suspicions that we suspicion him of robbing our traps,
then hell quit. If I was tryin to jail him I wouldnt of talked to him
like that. But I was warnin him and throwin a scare into him to steady
him.

Ye dont want to warn a feller like him till after ye catch im. He
dont look smartbut ye cant never tell by looks. He knows as how we
suspicion im now, and so hell do us all the harm hes able to. I see
it in his eye. You had ought to had the goods on im before ye warned
im, Young Dan. Why, we dont even know where hes been towhere he
traded the skins he took out! An we dont know that he aint got a big
bunch o traps set of his own.

Young Dan smiled.

He traded his skins at Beans Mill, down at the mouth of Oxbow, he
said. I guess he didnt show up at the Bend at all, though Amos
Bissings store is just as good as Luke Watts. He got his tea and
tobacco and everything he had in his sack from Luke Watt down to Beans
Mill; and I guess Lukes got his skins; and I guess weve got his hide,
if we want it.

Young Dan, yer a smart ladthe smartest I ever seean I wont say nay
to nary a one o yer propositionsbut it do seem to me yere doin a
powerful lot o guessin right now.

Honest to goodness, Andy, Im not guessing. Do you know Luke Watt? Have
you ever bought goods from him?

Sure, I know Luke Watt o Beans Mill. Yes, Ive traded with him, too.
What of it?

Then you know his hand-writing. Uncle Bill Tangier took me down to
Beans Mill one day two summers ago, and he bought a lot of stuff for me
and the youngsters at Watts store, and Mr. Watt figgered up the bill on
one of the parcels. He has a stiff right wrist, as you knowbroke it in
the woods when he was a lad and it wasnt set right. He used his whole
arm when he put down the figgers, working from the shoulder like a man
sawing a board. I dont believe theres another man in the world who
writes or makes figgers just like Luke Watt. And here is the paper Jim
Conleys tobacco was wrapped up in. I changed it this morning for
another piece of brown paper, before Conley was awake. Heres the
complete bill all figgered out in Luke Watts own original big
up-an-down figgers.

Young Dan unfolded a large, smudged piece of brown paper and passed it
to his partner. Andy Mace held it in his two corded hands and stared at
it in amazed silence.

Look at that nine-fifty multiplied by seven, said the youth. Conley
bought seven bottles. He paid sixty-six dollars and fifty cents for gin;
and he was well into number five when you found him lost in the woods.
And Watt soaked him six dollars for fifty bum cigars. He must of had
some good skins. But of course that bill is no proof that Conley traded
his skins with Luke Watt. I guess he did, though; for he wasnt gone
long enough to travel all the way down to Harlow and back. He did all
his buying from Luke Watt, anyhow.

The old woodsman refolded the paper carefully and returned it to his
partner. Then he filled his pipe and lit it with deliberate motions.

Young Dan, I was feelin kinder fretful a while back when I talked to
ye that-a-way, he said at last. My knee was hurtin me cruel. Yer
guess is as good to me as another mans oath. What dye reckon to do,
pardner?

I reckon to go out and fetch a doctor in to fix your knee for you,
first thing, replied Young Dan, as he stowed the paper away safely in a
breast-pocket.

Andy Mace shook his head.

This here jint plays out on me like this every now an agin, he
returned and I got medicine for it at home, made for me by Doc Johnston
down to Harlowinside medicine. The troubles a touch o rheumatics in
my blood, so the Doc said, an maybe the fight I had with the Quebecer
fifty year ago aint got as much to do with it as I let onan then
agin, maybe it has. Anyhow, Doc Johnstons medicine loosens up the jint
every time, an I got two bottles in my pantry this minute as good as
new. If I had them here Id be right as wheat in a day or two.

Why didnt you tell me so before? asked Young Dan.

Well, I reckoned it would sound kinder babyish; an I was hopin all
along until yesterday that it would quit hurtin an loosen up any
minute. I was bankin on the bars grease. But last night didnt help
it none.

Young Dan went out with his axe to chop wood and at the same time to
consider the imposing problem which confronted him. Andy Mace must have
his medicine as soon as possibleand that meant a two-day trip; and Mrs.
Conley and the two little Conleys must be fed, since the bread-winner
had brought nothing in for them except a pound of baconand that meant a
day; and Jim Conleys little game must be investigated at both endsand
that might well mean a week or more. What about his traps scattered
along four six-mile lines? His business was bound to sufferbut that was
not the thought that worried him most in connection with the traps. He
fretted at the thought of waste on one hand, and on the other of again
supplying Jim Conley with the means of acquiring more gin. These things
were bound to happen, he believed, so long as the traps remained set and
baited, and unattended by Andy Mace or himself. Animals bearing valuable
pelts would be caught only to suffer the unprofitable fate of being
devoured, pelts and all, by other fur-bearers, or to be skinned by Jim
Conley. The traps must be sprung; and that meant a hard two-day job. But
to leave Andy Mace without his medicine for four days instead of two was
out of the question!

Its moren one man can do! exclaimed Young Dan, sinking his axe deep
into the prostrate maple upon which he stood. A man can do two or three
things at once, maybe, but not all in different places, I guess. I cant
anyhow; and thats all there is to it! Now the question is, whats to be
done first? Guess Ill leave it to chance and toss for it.

He produced a quarter from a pocket, flipped it into the air off a
thumb-nail, caught it in his right hand and slapped his left over it.

Heads I get Andys medicine first, tails I dont, he said.

The coin lay tails up in his palm.

Thats too darned bad! he exclaimed. Poor Andy!

You talkin bout Andy Mace hey? asked a voice from the brush on his
right.

Young Dan turned and beheld a stranger standing within five yards of him
and regarding him intently with one eye. It was this matter of the one
eye that made the first and sharpest impression on the youth. The
strangers left eye was covered by a patch of black cloth. In addition
to these interesting facts, Young Dan saw that he was an Indian and past
middle-age, that he wore snowshoes and carried a pack and a rifle in a
blanket case, and that no smoke issued from his lips or from the bowl of
the short pipe which protruded from a corner of his mouth.

Sure Im talking about Andy Mace, replied Young Dan, recovering
swiftly from his astonishment.

Good, returned the stranger. Andy Mace the feller I wanter see pretty
quick. Maybe he got plenty tobac, what?

Young Dan shouldered his axe and descended from the trunk of the
prostrate maple. He slipped his feet into the thongs of his snowshoes
and put on his coat and mittens.

I guess he has enough, he said, pleasantly. Come along with me and
find out. Hes my partner.

They found Mr. Mace seated by the stove, with his stiff leg in a chair.

How do, Andy, said the stranger. Long time you no see me. Mr. Mace
sat up straight and stared from beneath shaggy eyebrows. Then he smiled
and relaxed.

Yer dead right its a long time, Pete Sabatis! he exclaimed. Yer
right there, old hoss. Glad to see ye agin at last, anyhow. Set down an
make yerself to home. Whats brought ye away acrost into these woods,
anyhow? Be they crowdin ye over on the Tobique country, Pete?

The visitor cleared himself from his outside things, including his
snowshoes, discarded his pack and rifle, then sat down close to the
stove and took the cold pipe from his mouth. He held the pipe up and
fixed the keen glance of his uncovered eye on Andy.

He dont burn no tobac this four-five day, he said.

Mr. Mace laughed and turned to Young Dan.

What dye think o that, pardner? he asked. Heres Pete Sabatis, that
I aint set eyes on this twenty year, come all the way acrost from the
Tobique country to bum a fill o baccy!

You got it aright, said the Maliseet, without so much as a flicker of
a smile. That feller say you got plenty. You make joke jes like you
ust to, hey?

I reckon yere the reel joker, Pete, answered Andy, handing over a
plug of tobacco. You got the reel face for it, anyhowthe same old
wooden face an the same identical old eye. Well, yer jokes is harmless;
and if ye come all these hunderds o miles for somethin moren a smoke
I reckon yell spit it out sooner or later. I be right-down glad to see
ye agin, anyhow.

Same here, said Young Dan. If youre a friend of Andys I hope youll
stop a while with us.

A good idee! exclaimed Andy. Sure hes a friend o mine, and one Id
trust with my last pound o bacon! Wherere ye headin for, Pete?
Anywheres in particular?

Dinner, said Pete Sabatis, lighting his pipe.

The same old bag o tricks, said Andy to his partner. I reckon he
callates to stop right here with us a spell. Thats yer idee, aint it,
Pete?

Yep, replied the Maliseet.

Young Dan was glad, for in this one-eyed Indian he saw the solution of
the problem that had been causing him such a weight of mental distress
all day. He said nothing of what was in his mind, however, but put wood
in the stove, washed his hands and commenced preparations for dinner.

Andy Mace talked and Pete Sabatis watched Young Dan with his lively
bright eye. Every now and then, Pete uttered a grunt of satisfaction at
what he saw.

It was a good dinner, a bang-up dinner, by Right Prong and Tobique
standards. It consisted of baked pork-and-beans in a brown crock, very
juicy and sweet, and a flock of hot biscuits, and a jar of Mrs. Evanss
strawberry preserve, and tea strong enough to be employed in the
heaviest sort of manual labor.

Pete Sabatis was not a large man; and so Young Dan decided that he must
have been hollow from his chin clear down to his knees before dinner.
After clattering the iron spoon all around the inside of the bean-crock
and lifting the last preserved strawberry to his mouth on the blade of
his knife, Mr. Sabatis drained the teapot and sat back in his rustic
chair. He produced his pipe and looked at Andy Mace.

Tobac, he said.

You pocketed a whole plug o mine before dinner, returned Andy. An
yeve got a knife to cut it with an a pipe to smoke it in. Heres a
match. Hope yer breath to puff with aint all gone.

The Maliseet drew forth the cake of tobacco thus delicately referred to
by his old friend, filled his pipe and lit it.

Id like to tell him how were fixed, and perhaps hed lend us a hand,
said Young Dan to his partner.

Sure hed lend us a hand, replied Andy. Tell him our story. Pete
Sabatis kin be trusted with anything in the world, I reckon, secrets or
goodsexceptin baccy.

So Young Dan told of their experiences with, and suspicions of, Jim
Conley, and of the problem which confronted him.

That aright, said Pete. What do you do first, hey?

That depends on you, replied the youth. Do you know the way to Andys
house?

Know him aright when you tell me.

Ill draw a map for you, if youll get Andys medicine.

To-morrow.

Thats fine. Im mighty glad you turned up. Ill go out now and spring
a few traps, and to-morrow Ill take some grub back to the Conleys and
see whats up. When you get home from Andys place with the medicine I
will light right out for Beans Mill.

During the afternoon Young Dan visited four traps on the eastward line.
He found a mink in one and nothing in the others, and left all alike
sprung and harmless. He did not travel as briskly as usual, for he did
not feel very spry. The exertions of the day before had slowed and
stiffened even his elastic sinews a little. His spirits were high,
however, thanks to the mental relief due to the arrival of Pete Sabatis.
Pete solved the problem which had frozen his immediate actions. With
Petes help, everything seemed possible now: Andy would have his
medicine, the Conley woman and children would be looked after, Jim
Conleys suspicious activities would be investigated and one line of
traps, at least, would be kept in operation. Apart from all this, the
Maliseet promised to be an entertaining companion. Young Dan had felt a
liking for him at the first sound of his voice and a keen interest in
him at the first glimpse of his patched eye. His arrival had been as
dramatic as it was opportune; his greeting of and reception by old Andy
Mace had been decidedly picturesque; his Puckish humor was as unusual as
his appearance. In short, he made a strong romantic appeal to the young
trapper.

Hes queer, like some of the folks in those stories, reflected Young
Dan. Queer as the queerest of them, but real, toomore real than any of
them. And hes all right. Andy says so.

Young Dan exploded two cartridges that afternoon. The bullet of each
knocked the head off a partridge. Upon his return to camp he skinned the
birds in half the time it would have taken him to pluck them, and fried
them for supper with a little pork. After supper he made a map of the
route to Andy Maces house and explained it at length to Pete Sabatis.
All three retired early to their blankets.

Pete Sabatis was the first to leave the camp next morning. He carried
food and tobacco in his pockets, a note from Young Dan for Amos Bissing,
the map of the route, the key to Andys door, and his rifle and
blankets. He moved off swiftly, with the reddening dawn on his
right-front, leaving an azure trail of smoke on the still air.

Its lucky for us that he turned up when he did, remarked Young Dan to
his partner, as he made up a modest parcel for the Conleys of tea and
flour and two tins of condensed milk. Did he come looking for you, or
was it just chance?

Hell tell us what he come for when hes good an ready, an not a
minute sooner, Young Dan, answered Andy. Maybe he come all the way
acrost from Tobique to see me, but I reckon that aint likely. How would
he know if I was alive or dead any moren I knowed if he was alive or
dead? It was chance landed him right here at this camp, anyhow, for all
he ever knowed about my whereabouts was that I hailed from the Oxbowan
that was twenty year ago. But we wont fret ourselves about why hes
here or why he come. He is here, an hes a danged good Injun, an
thats enough for us.

Young Dan took the northern track, which led crookedly to the Conley
cabin. He inspected the traps to the right and the left as he advanced,
bagged a fox and left all sprung and harmless behind him. He reached the
Conley cabin before noon and found Mrs. Conley chopping wood beside the
door. She said that Jim was off somewhere attending to his traps.

I dont want to see him, said Young Dan. I came to bring these few
things for you and the children, from my partner and me, because we know
that he didnt bring much grub back from the settlements with him.

He entered the cabin without removing his snowshoes and placed the
parcel of provisions on the table. The woman followed him, undid the
parcel and thanked him. She seemed nervous.

How dye know Jim didnt fetch in any grub? she asked.

We saw what he had, replied the trapper. Didnt he tell you about
stopping a night at our camp? About losing himself in the woods an Andy
Mace finding him?

No, he didnt. But hes sure got it in for you and yer old pardner!
Hes been cussin the two o ye steady ever since he come home. He says
how he had lashins o bacon an flour an was robbed of everything but
some bacon an tea.

I suppose you believed him, mam.

Not sos yed noticebut thats neither here nor there. What you best
do now is clear out o this before he comes home.

Do you think Im afraid of him?

I guess notbut I wisht yed beat it.

Young Dan immediately complied with her wish. As soon as he was out of
sight of the cabin he left the narrow trail of his own snowshoe tracks
and broke into the woods and started on a big curve which, if followed
long enough, would encircle the Conley habitation. Young Dan did not go
so far as that, however. He found what he was looking for before he had
made a semicircle of the curvea line of new snowshoe tracks. He did not
join this trail or cross it, but backed a few paces from it, changed
direction and moved parallel with it, keeping an eye on it through the
intervening screen of brush and branches. This course took him
southward, mile upon mile, and after a couple of hours of it he found
himself on his own and Andy Maces trapping-ground. He continued to
parallel Jim Conleys tracks, moving without sound and parting the
forest growth before him with the minimum of disturbance; and at last he
came to a place which he recognized as being on his own eastern line of
traps. There he halted and squatted to rest, as still as a waiting lynx
in the snow.

Large white flakes began to circle down from the low sky. The sun, which
had risen red, was now no more than a small blotch of radiance as
colorless as clear ice. The snow descended more thickly and swiftly,
blinding the weak sun and seeming to draw the sky down to the tops of
the tall sprucesand down even lower than that, until the soaring trees
were blanketed and hidden by it for half their height. Then Young Dan
moved again, this time on a straight course for the camp, and at his
best pace. This flurry of snow was altogether too thick and fast to take
liberties with. He wondered what Pete Sabatis would make of it with his
one eye. He was sorry that it had descended so violently as to interfere
with his investigations before he had actually caught Jim Conley at his
trapping. He felt reasonably certain, however, of the identity of the
traps which engaged Mr. Conleys attentions. That was enough to work
ahead on. He decided not to spring the traps on the eastern line, but to
leave them as they were for the thiefs immediate profit and final
undoing.

Young Dan reached home safely. The snow ceased falling shortly before
sundown, but with the setting of the sun a wind arose which set the
feathery flakes drifting and flying.

Andy Mace was in as talkative a mood as ever that night, despite the
fact that he was very evidently suffering a great deal of pain. He
admitted the pain, confessing that more joints than his right knee hurt
him now.

But that there medicine o Doc Johnstons ll melt the misery out o me
all right, he said. Ill be takin a dose of it this time to-morrow
night; and yell see me to work agin within a couple o days, Young Dan,
spry as a cat an loose as ashes.

Dont you worry about the work, Andy, returned Young Dan. Give the
medicine a fair chance when you get it. I hope Pete will be back by
to-morrow nightbut he couldnt of traveled much this afternoon, in that
storm and in country strange to him.

Thats where yere wrong, replied Andy. I never knowed a likelier man
nor that same Pete Sabatis to go to wherever he wanted to git to. He
could do that trip backwards, an with both eyes patched instead of only
one. That flurry o snow wouldnt stop him a minute, in strange country
or old.

What happened to his eye, anyhow? asked Young Dan.

Andy rubbed his thin knees with his thin hands for several seconds in
silence, gazing thoughtfully into the red draft of the stove. Then he
looked at his partner and combed his long whiskers with long fingers.

Maybe he wouldnt care for me to tell ye that, lad, he said. I reckon
he wouldnt yet awhile, till he knows ye better. But I kin tell ye this
much, pardnerI was with him when he lost it, twenty-four year agoand
he is as good a man with one eye as ever he was with two. He lost it in
a kinder private affair, ye understand: and there aint a prouder man
walkin the woods either side the height-o-land nor himexceptin in
the matter o baccy.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER VIII

                        THE ADVENTURE OF SABATIS


The wind was abroad all the next day, sweeping the snow from the broad
branches and high spires of the forest and shoveling it into drifts
along the windward edges of all open spaces. Young Dan worked at the
wood-pile and the pelts all day, and Mr. Mace smoked his pipe and rubbed
his painful joints and wondered if old age were creeping upon him. Young
Dan was chopping a stick of dry birch near the door, and the small sun
was on the edge of the western horizon, when Pete Sabatis appeared. Pete
was powdered white with snow from the webbed racquets on his feet to the
crown of his fur cap.

Howdy, he said.

Young Dan stared at him in amazement.

I knew youd have to give it up, he said, and Im mighty glad youve
found your way back. Thats moren I could do, with the snow drifting
like it has all day.

The old Maliseet smiled and snorted and entered the camp. Young Dan
followed a few minutes later depressed by the thought of Andy Maces
disappointment and yet relieved to know that the old Indian was safe. By
the fire-shine and the mild light of a candle on the table, he beheld
his partner dosing himself with a large spoon from a large bottle and
Pete Sabatis laying out tea and bacon and tobacco on the floor.

So you got there! exclaimed Young Dan. You got to Andys place in
that stormand home again!

Both old men turned to him. Petes one eye grew rounder and brighter for
a second; and Mr. Mace gulped down his medicine, pulled a wry face and
then chuckled.

Pete Sabatis never yet started out for anywheres he didnt git to,
said Andy. Snow nor rain nor wind nor darkness cant stop him. He
travels as straight with one eye as ever he did with two.

I didnt know the man was living, or had ever lived, who could hold a
straight course through new country on such a day as yesterday, said
Young Dan. And now I know I was mistaken, he added.

Pete Sabatis had nothing to say about his journey. The trip had been
unadventurous. He had not encountered any difficulties worth mentioning.
Andys key had fitted Andys door and he had found the bottles of
medicine on the very shelf in the pantry which Andy had described to
him. And he had found the store at the Bend exactly where he had
expected to find it and the storekeeper had not hesitated a moment in
the matter of filling the order.

Young Dan cooked the best supper he knew how to with the materials at
hand; and after supper, when the old mens pipes were drawing to their
entire satisfaction, Andy said, Pete, Id like fine to tell Young Dan
Evans here about how ye happened to lose yer eye.

The Maliseet fixed his remaining eye on the youth with a glance so
searching that the other remembered something he had read in a book
about a thing called an X-Ray.

It aint like as if Young Dan was nothin moren my pardner, continued
Andy. Hes like a brother to me; and his hearts as right as his brains
is smart.

Thats aright, said Pete Sabatis. Go ahead an tell im.

This heres a kinder personal story, began Andy, settling back in his
chair. Twenty-four years ago this very winter, I was in the woods on
Pyles Brook, over in the Tobique country, choppin for Howard Frazer. I
was restless in them days; and Ill bet there aint a block of woods ten
mile square in all the Province I aint had a foot into, lumberin or
huntin or trappin fur. Well, I knowed that country pretty nigh as well
as I know the Oxbowso I thought. I diskivered later as how Id thought
wrong. Pete Sabatis here was choppin for Frazers gang, too. That was a
kinder onusual thing, even in them daysa full-blooded Injun working
hard an honest with a crew of lumbermen. But Pete allus was one who
could do a white mans job as well as an Injunsan both a mite
bettern any other Injun or white man could do it. Id say the same even
if he wasnt right here a-listenin to me.

Well, I didnt have no better friend in that outfit nor this here Pete
Sabatis, and it was the same with himwhat ye might call visey versus, I
reckon. But, mind ye, I didnt know the first darned thing about Petes
private life. He was a jolly feller, though never much of a talker an
nothin at all of a laugher. But all of a suddent, along about January,
he begun to study hard on somethin deep inside himself. Hed stop still
as if he was frozen all of a suddent in the middle of choppin into the
butt of a big tree, with his axe sunk to the eye in the yellow wood, an
stare kinder across-eyed into himself, with a look on his face like he
didnt care much for what he seen. Of course I knowed he wasnt sick,
but I asked him if he was; an when he said as how he wasnt, then I
callated his trouble was somethin Id best not ask him any more
questions about.

So it went on for three days, maybe; an then one Saturday night, after
supper, he asks me if Ill make a trip with him next day.

A trip? sez I. What sort o trip?

Snowshoes, sez Pete.

Sure, but how far? I sez.

Quite a spell, he answers back. A long ways an rough goin, an
trouble at the end of it.

Well, theres plenty men whod set back hard in their britchen when
theyd hear a note like thatbut not me, twenty-four year ago, nor
to-day. We started eastward into the tall timber before sun-up that
Sunday mornin, with grub enough for two days maybe, and blankets, and
our axes. Pete carried a muzzle-loader gun you could shoot bullets out
of pretty straight up to seventy yards. It was a clear, cold day,
without so much as a fan of wind abroad. It was Sunday, as Ive told ye;
an it felt like Sundaykinder waitin an uncommon. Pete went slam
through everything on a straight line all his own as fast as he could
flop his racquets along, but it didnt bother me none to keep up to him.
He didnt say a word. We halted and et about noonbut even then he
wouldnt talk.

Andy Mace paused to relight his pipe.

Talk, said Pete Sabatis. Too much talk. You lemme tell how that
happen, so we dont set up all night. Pretty soon we come to one little
clearin in the woods, with one log shanty on him. We go to door an
open him an step inside. There we find the folk I look for aright.
Andy Mace look at them like he dont know nothin at allan so he
dont. I push him back on the door till it shut an give him the gun.
Then I take one step acrost at that half-breed man, an the woman grab
somethin from the wall back of him and BANGan Pete Sabatis dont know
nothin else for quite a spell.

I callate Im tellin this story! interrupted Andy. Young Dan aint
got a notion what yer talkin about. Hes smart, but hes only human.
Why, he dont even know yet who them folks was an what you had come to
see them about.

An you didnt, neither, retorted Pete. So after long while I open
one eye an feel mighty sick. They got me in the bunk then, with head
all tie up an brandy inside me, an Andy Mace an them two lookin down
like they think I dont never open one eye any more, maybe. Then that
woman, who is my daughter, say, I shoot out your eye. What for you come
here, anyhow? Then I say, You shoot my eye clear out, hey? Andy say
then, You got only one eye now, Pete, an thats gospel. Then that
woman, my papoose one time, say, You come to kill Pierre, so I shoot
quick. I feel mighty sick, you bet, for that pain in my head an the
think how I got only one eye left, but I pretty near laugh.

Thats right! exclaimed Andy Mace. He come about as nigh to laughin
real hearty then as ever I see him, durn his old leather face. Ye see,
pardner, that squaw, Petes daughter, had made a mistake. Her husband,
that there halfbreed, Pierre, had stole fur on Pete years before, till
Pete had chased him out o the country. But theyd come sneakin back
that winter, an Pete had heard about it an studied on it. He didnt
like that feller, Pierre; but he figgered out as how hed go look the
two of em over an kinder give them his blessin an some money if he
seen that Pierre was doin right by his wife, who was Petes own
daughter. An his daughter up an shot an eye out o him before he could
say howdy. An what dye reckon Pete Sabatis done then, Young Dan? He
sez, Pretty good breed, that Pierre, if she like him so darn much
stillan he give them some money an said how he was glad to see them
back in the Tobique country even if he had only one eye to see them
with. _And next day he snowshoed back to Howard Frazers camp._ Thats
how he lost his eye, twenty-four years ago this winter; an now theres
five of us who know about it instead of only four. An he quit choppin
for only two days after gittin back to camp. Thats the sort o man
Pete Sabatis is!

Talk, talk, talk! Thats the kind of feller Andy Mace is, said the
Maliseet, winking his only eye at Young Dan very deliberately.

Young Dan was greatly impressed by the story of Petes just temper and
amazing physical stamina. He said so. Then, at Andys request, he read a
story of the wizard of Harley Street. Andy interrupted the narrative
frequently, but the Maliseet listened in keen silence.

It couldnt be done, nohow, said Andy, at the conclusion of the tale.
The devil himself couldnt of worked it out like that.

Maybe, said Pete. I dunno.

Young Dan left the camp bright and early next morning with his uncles
rifle, axe and blankets, a pack of fine furs and grub enough to last him
to Beans Mill. He pushed along steadily all day and slept in a hole in
the snow that night. He crossed the river well above his fathers farm
and gave it and the village at the Bend a wide offing. He reached the
outskirts of the settlement of Beans Mill about noon and dined well
beside his own fire in a thicket of young spruces before appearing to
the settlers. Then he went straight to Luke Watts store.

Mr. Watt did a big business in a small store. Thats the kind of
business man he was, but in character he was a very different sort of
person. He was small in character and large in body and manner. As a
storekeeper his activities were larger than his premises, but as a man,
his chest and legs and arms and skullyes, and his lower chestwere
much too large for him. He had a stiff right wrist, calculating and
watchful eyes of no particular color, large hands queerly shaped and a
large manner of good-fellowship and an unattractive mustache.

Young Dan found Luke Watt behind his counter, in a corner close to one
of the dirty windows, barricaded into his position by boxes and barrels
and crates and bags. Young Dan worked his way inward to the counter. He
saw, as he advanced, that the other did not know him.

Good morning, Mr. Watt, he said. Im Dan Evans from up past the
BendYoung Dan Evans. I got a few skins here I want to sell.

Of course yere Dan Evans! exclaimed Luke Watt. Didnt I know it the
minute I see you! Lay it there! Hows tricks up river?

Pretty good, I guess, replied the youth. Its been a great winter for
trapping so far, anyhow.

He undid his pack on the head of a barrel at his elbow and placed a
couple of pelts on the counter. A swift glance at Watts face told him
that the storekeeper was finding it difficult to hide his enthusiasm.

Umfisher, said Mr. Watt. Mighty common skins, aint they?

They are as good fisher as were ever trapped on the Oxbow, said Young
Dan.

Sure theyre good of their kindbut theyre fisher; and fisher are
all-fired common this year. And skins aint much in my line, anyhow. I
buy a fewbut Im that good natured an easy I always lose money on the
deal. What dye figger these two skins is worth? Three times their real
value, Ill bet a dollar!

Maybe so, replied Young Dan slowly and in a puzzled voice. Yes, just
about that, I guess. I dont know as much about selling em as I do
about catching em.

A flicker of a smile, cold and swift, showed beyond the drooping ends of
Luke Watts mustache, and for an instant a light of amusement and
satisfaction glimmered in his eyes.

I know you pay a whole lot for black fox, continued Young Dan.

Black fox! exclaimed the other. You got half a dozen black foxes
right here with youI dont think. Say, Dan, what you been drinkin?

I dont drink, Mr. Wattbut I trap in a good country for black foxand
I know that you gave Jim Conley a mighty good price for his.

The storekeepers eyes became very hard and keen with eagerness and
caution. He squared his elbows on the counter and leaned across toward
the youth. So, for several seconds, he stared in silence; and the other
returned the stare with an innocent and unwavering gaze.

What dye know about Jim Conley? he asked, in a low voice.

Never saw him before this winter, but were trapping the same line of
country now, returned Young Dan. Were working way up past the
Prongs.

Dye mean you an Jim Conley are pardners?

We use the same traps. Guess you might call it a partnership.

It wasnt a first-class skin, that wasnt, as you know yerself, Dan. It
was more patch than black. But if you have another like it Ill pay the
same price, even if I lose money on itseein its you.

All in cash, Mr. Watt?

Not at the same price. I always figger on making part payment in trade.
But whats the matter with that? Wasnt Conley satisfied last time?

I reckon he wasbut gin aint good for him. He got lost getting home.

Not so loud, whispered Luke Watt. Call it trade. Didnt Conley warn
you to mind yer tongue? You talk like a fool; and if you aint more
careful youll land yer pardner in jail. But thats all right, seein
its yerself. Ill buy yer skinsall you have therean give you top
price. But you got to take part payment in trade. Any kind o trade.
Tea, tobacco, flouranything you want or yer pardner wants. My prices
are right.

Thats fair, Mr. Watt. Will you pay me forty dollars for these two
fishers? They are the best fishers Ive seen this winter, color and
size.

The storekeeper stood upright and laughed heartily. He straightened his
back to it and squared his shoulders to it until Young Dan thought the
buttons would fly off the straining front of the big waistcoat.

Forty dollars! exclaimed the big man at last, like one who sees the
point of a good joke and immediately repeats it to show that he has seen
it. Forty dollars! Thats pretty good, Dan! Darned good!

Pretty fair, returned Young Dan, quietly. Theyre worth more.

Are you serious, young fellow? Dye mean forty real dollars for them
two skins? You look kinder as if you meant it. You must be crazy!

Young Dan sighed and removed the pelts from the counter to the rest of
the pack. Slowly he tied up the pack, watching the storekeeper all the
while with the tail of his right eye. He shouldered the pack and took up
the axe and stockinged rifle.

Not so fast, Dan! cried Mr. Watt. That aint any way to do business.
Say, are you crazy? Lets see them skins again, and maybe Ill go as
high as thirty-five. And gimme a look at the rest o the lot.

I been reading in the papers what furs are worth this year, replied
the youth. You cant fool me. I aint Jim Conley. So long.

Anger and something of apprehension flamed in Luke Watts unpleasant
eyes and big face. With a muttered oath he started for the door in the
counterbut before he reached it, Young Dan had closed the door of the
store at his heels. And by the time the big man had reached that door,
after squeezing his way through the clutter of barrels and crates, Young
Dan was half-way down the village street.

Young Dan kept on going along the well-beaten river road, with his
snowshoes on his back instead of his feet, for half an hour. He paused
now and again to glance over his shoulder, for he believed that Luke
Watt would soon be on his tracks with a horse and pung. And in that he
was right. Looking back from the top of one rise he saw a fast-trotting
horse come over another rise half a mile behind. Then he turned to the
right, into a logging road, and ran at top speed for a couple of hundred
yards. The logging road was crooked, and rough underfoot. After the
sprint, Young Dan strapped his snowshoes on and hopped into the woods.
He glanced up at the sun, then went forward on a straight course at a
fine pace. He felt very well satisfied with his mornings work. He had
confirmed his suspicions of Mr. Luke Watt, at least.

I have the goods on both of them, he said. I worked it out just
right. Now I guess theyll both have to behave themselves or clear right
out of this country. Ive got enough on Conley to scare him into being
good and looking after his wife and kids, thats certain.

He halted for long enough to eat two sandwiches of cold bread and colder
bacon, standing. Then, steering by the sun, he continued to break
straight through the woods toward the little town of Harlow.

Luke Watt, in his little red pung behind his leggy trotter, drove
straight on down the well-beaten river road, intent on reaching the
upper edge of Harlow ahead of Young Dan. If the trapper held to the road
and was overtaken on the way, all the better for the storekeeper, of
coursebut the great thing was a meeting this side of Harlow. It was not
the fear of losing trade that inspired Mr. Watt to this determination
and this unusual speed. He would regret a loss of trade, sure enough;
but what he actually feared was the Law. He suspected Young Dan Evans.
He suspected him of being less simple and ignorant than he seemed to be
on the surface. He suspected himself of having been dangerously
indiscreet in so quickly accepting that long-legged youth as nothing but
a source of profit.

He worked me for a rube, I do believe, he reflected. I must get him
before he gets me; an then, if I cant scare him off Ill have to buy
him off. I reckon hell scare easy enough, if hes mixed up with Jim
Conley.

But would that young fellow scare easily? There had been a look in his
eyes that said no to the scare idea.

There was no shorter course between the Bend and Harlow than the river
road. There was no bee-line through the woods that would cut so much as
a yard off it. Mr. Watt knew this. He drove straight into the town and
stabled his horse. Then he walked back beyond the up-river end of the
town, accompanied by a middle-aged, middle-sized, seedy looking man with
whom he seemed to be very well acquainted. So narrow is that small town
that two men could easily keep an eye on all the ways of entrance to it
at either end. Mr. Watt and his friend took up positions of advantage
several hundred yards apart and waited.

The sun was low when Young Dan came out of the woods and headed
slantwise across a wide field beside the highway.

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER IX

                         THE FIGHT IN THE SNOW


Young Dan Evans slanted across the white field, heading for the highroad
which led smoothly into the little town of Harlow. His journey was
within a half-mile of its completion. He had worked hard ever since
leaving Beans Mill, through thick timber and untracked snow; and now he
was tired and hungry but in fine spirits. He had thought much of Andy
Mace and Pete Sabatis during the journeyof their admiration for one
anothers qualities of physical and spiritual fiberand believed that
they would soon take him as seriously as they now considered each other.
Of course Andy was his firm friend and already thought highly of his
smartness along certain linesbut he feared that he had not yet made a
very deep impression on the one-eyed Indian. He suspected that Pete
Sabatis considered him a trifle too big for his cap and boots. He had
seen something of the kind in the old mans one eye that very morning.

I guess he thinks Im just a cub playing at something and trying to
fool folks into thinking Im a smart man, he reflected. But when I
have that big Luke Watt jumping to my say-so, and that thieving drunkard
Jim Conley come to heel like a trained partridge-dog, and Mrs. Conley
and the kids fed and looked after properly, I guess he will have to
admit that I know what Im doing.

Thus engaged with his thoughts, he drew near to an extensive grove of
swamp-birches and alders which grew along the snow-drifted fence like a
screen between the field and the highroad. He carried his blankets and
pack of furs on his back, his axe on his right shoulder and his cased
rifle hung by its sling on his left shoulder.

He was close to the edge of the tangle of birches and alders, and about
midway of its length, when a bulky figure in a coonskin coat arose from
the snow and stepped out in front of him.

Young Dan Evans did so many things all at once then that it is difficult
to disentangle and describe his actions. Mind and body worked quick as
thoughtquicker, perhaps, for he was scarcely conscious of thinking. As
he recognized Luke Watt in the very instant of seeing him he let
everything he carried slip and fall from him into the snow in one
shrugging motionpack and rifle and axeand jumped forward straight and
hard. Even as he jumped, he saw Luke Watt draw something from a
side-pocket of the fur coatbut he did not flinch from the mark. He
struck Watt with his whole body all at once. His knees dug into the big
mans middle and his left arm went around the fur-clad thick neck; and
as they fell he heard the revolver explode twice and felt the jolt of
the gloved hand that held it against his ribs; and he drew up his left
knee and stamped a wide snowshoe on Watts right arm, and struck the big
face with his right fist. Thus they sank into the drift, with Luke Watt
underneath and flat on his back. Young Dan trod the hand that held the
revolver deep into the snow; and he struck the vanishing face again and
again, though the snow muffled the blows of his mittened fist; and, all
the while, his right knee crushed and pounded.

Luke Watt struggledbut what was the use! He was breathless, helpless,
bound and half smothered by the snow. All this violence had occurred so
swiftly that he could not fully realize exactly what had happened. He
had confronted the young trapper with his gun ready and the game in his
hand; and now, a few seconds later, his mouth was choked with snow, his
eyes were blinded, his arms and weapon were powerless and he was being
beaten to death!

Young Dan shook the mitten from his left hand and thrust his bare hand
deep into the snow. In a moment he stood up and stepped backward a pace
or two, with Luke Watts revolver in his grasp. He looked about him and
saw a stooped figure on the road walking hastily townward. He turned
again to his enemy, who was sitting up by this time and struggling
painfully for breath. He flung the revolver far away and recovered his
axe, pack and rifle.

Howre you feeling now? he asked.

Mr. Watt gulped a mouthful of air but made no attempt to answer. He did
not even open his eyes. He paid no attention to the others departure.

Young Dan found the hotel without difficulty and entered the office
fully equipped.

Will you kindly tell me the way to the nearest sheriff? he asked of
the man at the desk.

The nearest sheriff? repeated the hotel-keeper. Do I get you, young
feller? Yere askin the way to the nearest sheriff?

There were four other men in that dreary little office of varnished
brown woodwork, mangey mooseheads and crockery cuspidors. These all
stared curiously at the young trapper and shifted their positions in
their chairs. The hotel-keeper leaned far over his little counter.

Dye want to give yerself up? he added, with a rude attempt at wit.

I have asked you a simple and civil question, said Young Dan in his
quietest voice. If you dont understand simple questions here and dont
answer civil ones, then Ill ask somewhere else. What about it?

The hotel-keeper and his chaired patrons exchanged glances.

Sure, sure, said the former, hurriedly. We aint got a sheriff in
this town, but we got a fust-class depity-sheriff by the name of Archie
Wallace. Maybe yeve heared of him; an maybe he kin do yer business for
yer as well as the full-blowed high sheriff of the county. What was it
you said you wanted to see him about?

I didnt say, replied Young Dan, with a disarming smile. Thank you
very much for the information; and now if youll tell me where I can
find Mr. Wallace Ill step along and stop troubling you.

The hotel-keeper reached for his coat, which hung on a hook behind him.

No trouble at all, he said. Glad to oblige. Ill step along an show
you his very door. I always aim to help strangers all I know how.

Ye hadnt ought to leave yer seegar-stand in the rush hour, Dave, said
one of the patrons, getting quickly out of his chair. Ill take the
young man to Archie Wallace. Its fair on my way home.

The hotel-keeper paid no attention to this offer but donned coat and cap
and issued from behind the counter and dusty cigar-stand.

Follow me, stranger, he invited, leading the way out. Me and the
depity-sheriff are old friends. Ill make you known to him.

So Young Dan followed the hotel-keeper, and three of the four patrons
followed close upon the heels of Young Dan. The deputy-sheriffs house
was not more than fifty yards from the hotel; and the young trapper
smiled politely and said nothing all the way to it. The hotel-keeper
rang the bell and took up a position on the top step in front of Young
Dan.

The door was opened by a tall, lean man who looked like a woodsman and
wore a Cardigan jacket and grey homespun trousers tucked into
high-legged larrigans of oil-tanned leather.

Heres a young feller lookin for you on important business, Archie,
said the hotel-keeper. It is so all-fired important that I brought him
right along to you myself, so there wouldnt be no possible mistake.

The deputy-sheriff looked at Young Dan Evans with calm inquiry.

It is private business, explained Young Dan, smiling; and these
gentlemen dont know any more about it or me than I do about them. I
never so much as set eyes on any one of them in my life until five
minutes ago. What I have to say is for your private hearing, if you are
really an officer of the law.

Step in, said the tall man to Young Dan; and to the others he said
drily, Thanks, boys, for escortin the young stranger to the right
place. Then he closed the door in the hotel-keepers face. He led the
way into a small room opening off the narrow hallan untidy, stale
cigar-scented room poorly illumined by an oil lamp with a green paper
shade.

Dump your outfit in the corner and sit down, he invited.

Young Dan obeyed and removed his cap and mitts and outer coat. The
deputy-sheriff sat down in his own arm-chair beside the untidy table and
removed the shade from the lamp so that the light reached his visitors
face. For several seconds he gazed keenly but pleasantly at Young Dan.

Ive seen you before, somewheres or other, he said. Seems to me I
have known you pretty well, sometime or other. Who are you an where
from?

Young Dan answered the questions briefly but clearly.

You remind me of someone I know well, said Mr. Wallace. But it isnt
yerself, for I never saw nor heard of you before. A full-grown manand a
smart one. You speak like himwhoever he is.

Bill Tangler, maybe? Youd know him, I guess. Hes my uncle.

Bill Tangler it is! Your uncle, hey? Well, son, youve got a smart
uncle. More than that, hes able; an better still, hes white. If Bill
Tanglers your uncle we dont need any more introductionso fire away.

Young Dan told briefly of his partnership with old Andy Mace, and
produced from an inner pocket the letter from his uncle containing the
suggestion of the venture and the partnership and the offer of camp and
outfit. Archie Wallace chuckled over the letter. Then the trapper told
of his encounters with Jim Conley, of the rebaited trap, and of the
night Conley went off his course in the woods with a cargo of gin inside
and out. He produced and exhibited the piece of paper upon which Mr.
Luke Watt had figured out Jim Conleys bill. The deputy-sheriff studied
that exhibit very intently and slapped his hand on his thigh.

Youre a winner, Dan Evans! he exclaimed. Have a cigar.

Young Dan shook his head to the cigar and told his adventures of the
day, up to the very minute of telling. He raised his short coat of
wool-lined blanketing from the floor and held it up to the others view.

And here I am; and heres where Luke Watt burnt two holes in my jacket
with his revolver, he concluded.

Archie Wallace examined the holes in the coat without a word. Then he
lit a fresh cigar from the butt of an old one, returned the green shade
to the lamp and sat well back in his chair. He gazed at the lamp-shade
in meditative silence. His manner impressed Young Dan. Suddenly he
turned his glance upon his visitor and asked abruptly, Can you cook?

The nature of the question was so unexpected that Young Dan was far too
astonished to reply. He blushed and stared, wondering if he was being
made fun of.

Can you cook? repeated the deputy-sheriff.

Yes.

Then youll oblige me by goin to the kitchen and gettin supper for
the two of us, said the official. Here are matches, and youll find a
lamp on the table. The kettles bilin, the coffee-pot an fryin pan
are on the back of the stove, and theres ham and eggs all ready set out
on the dresser. Im a bum cook myself. Theres an old hound somewheres
in the house who is the only person besides myself who can stomach my
cookery. He wont bite you if you treat him friendly. While youre
gettin supper Ill sit right here an study over what you told me. It
needs some study.

So Young Dan started for the kitchen. In the narrow hall he met the old
hound, which seemed delighted with him and followed eagerly into the
kitchen. It was an extraordinary kitchen. All the dishes were jumbled up
on the table, and not one of them was clean. But the fire of dry
hardwood was burning clear in the stove and both pot and kettle were
full and boiling. He went briskly to work; and in half an hour all the
dishes were washed, the table was laid and supper was ready.

The deputy-sheriff swallowed his first cup of coffee in silence. Then he
said, Jim Conleys a trap-thief all right, all rightbut you cant
prove it on him. Hes a liar I reckon, and I know darned well you aint
a liarbut his word about that trap and whatever he took from it is as
good as yours to the Law. So I cant round him upbut I can scare all
the blood and gin in his nose back to his rotten heart.

I guess thatll be all he will need, replied Young Dan.

Mr. Wallace nodded and devoured ham and eggs for five minutes or so with
undivided attention.

As for Luke Wattwell, that feller is nigh as strong as he is
slippery, he said, pouring more coffee. Hes so danged crooked that he
had ought tove been thrown away with all the corkscrews when the
country went dry. Or hed ought to of moved over into Quebec. He is
strong, toobut I reckon we got the goods on him all right, all right.
Do you think you could find that revolver of his you threw away?or do
you reckon hes maybe picked it up himself?

I guess I could find it; and I dont think he has picked it up because
his eyes were shut and full of snow when I threw it away, replied Young
Dan. I was mad, you know, what with his shooting at me and everything;
and it was only the deep snow and my mitts that saved him from getting a
sight worse than he got.

Do you want to arrest him for assault with intent to kill, an for
sellin gin; or do you want to run him out of the country on a pair of
cold feet? asked the deputy-sheriff. Take your choice, Dan.

Neither, said the youth. Neither, if we can scare him enough to
handle him the way I want to. If we can scare him into keeping the law
and doing something for Jim Conleys wife and kids, Ill be satisfied.

But we got him cold, said the other. Youve done a smart piece of
work, Dan Evans. Youve caught Luke just how Ive been tryin to catch
him this six months back. But whats your idee? Whats this about
wantin that fat lubber to do something for Conleys wife an kids?

They need help. Jim Conleys no good. The way I figger it is, Luke Watt
cheated Conley on the price of that skin. Whatever the skin was, patch
or black, we know Conley didnt get even as much as a third of the right
price. And if we cant prove that the skin belonged to Andy Mace and me,
then it was Conleys rightful property, in the law. So if we can shoot a
real scare into Luke Watta regular death-cold frightthen we can make
him hand over the rest of the price of that skin, in groceries and boots
and clothing, to Jim Conleys family. Ill pick out the goodsenough to
last them till well on in the spring; and Wattll have to pay to have
them packed in to Conleys camp. Thats my idea.

The deputy-sheriff drank more coffee, scratched his chin and relit the
half-smoked cigar.

Youre a philanthropist, Dan Evans, he said. Youre like your uncle
Bill Tangler in that.

Young Dan let that pass with a noncommittal smile, for the word was one
which he had somehow overlooked in his explorations into literature. But
he felt that it was nothing to be ashamed of if the same could be said
of his uncle Bill Tangler.

And maybe youre right, continued Mr. Wallace. You know the situation
and I dont, so its for you to say. As for the scareif we find that
revolver we can scare Watt into totin a years supply of grub all the
way in to the Right Prong of Oxbow on his own fat back. And I reckon
hell keep the law after weve had a chat with him, for he aint a fool.
Hed sooner keep it along with his freedom than behind stone walls and
iron bars, you can betcher hat on that. But there are other sides to the
question to be considered. Theres no sense in jumpin before we look
all round for the dryest place to land. So far youve considered nothin
but Jim Conleys familys need of grub and clothes. Well, thats all
right in its way, and as far as it goesbut it will sure encourage Jim
Conley to sit at home all day and eat his head off. If he cant drink
hell eat. A feller like him has just got to be doin something with his
mouth all the time; and I reckon he aint got brains enough to do much
talkin. If feedin his wife and children will make a good citizen out
of him, then youre dead right. But what about Luke Watt? We can scare
him into keeping the law as far as bootleggin gin is concerned, but we
cant stop him cheatin in his trade every chance he gets. We couldnt
make a good citizen of him in a hundred years. And that aint all. Not
by a long shot! Suppose I nab him in my official capacity, with his
number right in my pocket? Whatll folks say about Deputy-Sheriff Archie
Wallace then, dye think? Theyll say that Deputy-Sheriff Archie Wallace
is an all-fired smart, able, slick and deserving officer! Yes, Dan
Evans, it will sure mean feathers a foot high in my hat. And what will
be said about the young trapper from way back in the woods who did the
brain-work and took the risk? Theyll say youre the best detective
outside the covers of a book they ever heard tell of. Youll be a big
man with your name in the newspapersand Ill be the next high sheriff
of this county. Thats _my_ idea.

And it is a good idea, replied Young Dan, reflectively. It sounds
mighty good to me, of course. Id like fine to see my name in the papers
as a detective, but I wasnt figgering on anything like that. I want to
see that woman and her children decently fed. I dont like her much,
mind youbut shes sure a courageous mother, and I pity her, and so
would you if you knew Jim Conley. If we could scare him into earning a
living for his family, then Id certainly like your idea bettern mine.

But you aint reckonin on makin Luke Watt support Conleys wife and
kids all the rest of their lives, surely? returned Mr. Wallace. That
would be goin a mite too far with it. Hed sooner go to jail than do
that, I wouldnt wonder. No, that wont do! You got to make Conley get
to work. Philanthropys a fine thing, but justice is a fine thing, too.

Youre right, Mr. Wallaceand you are the deputy-sheriff. I guess
whatever you say goes. All I want to do is scare Jim Conley off of our
trap-lines, and help his family, and smash that hound, Luke Watt.

Then wed best sleep on it, an have a look for that revolver first
thing in the morning, said the other. Maybe well hit on a way of
reconciling your hunger for philanthropy with my thirst for fame and
promotion.

They sound as if theyd ought to pull all right in double-harness,
remarked the youth, with that smile which reminded the deputy-sheriff of
Bill Tangler.

The deputy-sheriff wakened his guest at the first peep of day; and after
breakfast they set out in a red pung behind a long-gaited
three-year-old. Young Dan left his skins locked securely away in one of
Mr. Wallaces closets, with the understanding that Wallace would ship
them to an honest fur-dealer immediately upon his return from the
present expedition. This arrangement would be sure to prove advantageous
to Young Dan and his partner, for Archie Wallace, as deputy-sheriff of
the county, would obtain a higher price for the furs than a private
trapper could possibly make any buyer consider reasonable. They stopped
near the scene of the trappers swift and violent encounter with the
storekeeper from Beans Mill, slipped on their snowshoes and entered the
slanting field. Mr. Wallace regarded the deep marks of the struggle with
chuckles of satisfaction. Then Young Dan led him about thirty yards away
to a very small cut in the snow and dug up Luke Watts revolver. He
handed the weapon to Wallace, who wiped it off, tied it up carefully in
his handkerchief and stowed it away in his pocket.

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER X

                            FEAR OF THE LAW


The road between Harlow and Beans Mill was all that hoof and heart
could wish, and the long-gaited three-year-old was sound in wind and
limb and as fresh as the frosty morning. It was still early in the day
when the deputy-sheriff drew rein in front of Luke Watts store. He
jumped out and hitched the strawberry mare to a well-chewed post and
threw a blanket and a goat-skin robe over her. Then he cleared the frost
from his eye-lashes, pulled his fur mittens off and threw them into the
pung and rubbed his bare hands briskly together as if to limber up the
fingers. Then he sank his hands deep into the roomy side-pockets of his
fur coat.

You keep your collar turned up an your cap pulled down and sit right
there till you get the high sign, he said to Young Dan.

Young Dan nodded his muffled head. He sat stuffily in the pung, very
bulky and shapeless in an old coonskin coat of the deputy-sheriffs,
looking as much like The Worlds Fattest Lady as anything else in the
worldmuch more like that than like a lanky young trapper of fur.

As Archie Wallace pushed open the door of the store he closed his eyes
tight, the quicker to readjust them to the gloom within from the
brightness without. As he closed the door behind him with his left
elbowfor still his right hand was in his pockethe opened his eyes and
looked at everything in one wide-eyed glance. He saw, in that first
comprehensive look, everything in the storethe counter, the fancy
groceries on the dirty shelves, the barrels and crates, the baskets of
eggs, the chewing-gum and depressing cigars in the little show-case, the
boots and suspenders and amazing neckties hanging aloft, and Mrs. Watt
and three customerseverything which he had expected to see except Luke
Watt. He made his way to the counter and Mrs. Watt and wished her a
rather grim good-morning. His professional manner was always uppermost
when he was actually engaged in the final stages of a piece of
professional work. He felt that he owed this alike to the Law and to the
probable offenders against the Law.

I want to speak to your husband, Luke Watt, he continued.

Mrs. Watt, who was as like Mr. Watt in appearance and character as a
woman could be, changed color swiftly and at the same time met the mans
grim gaze with a hard and brazen glint in her eyes.

You sure aint forgot my husbands name, Archie Wallace, she said.
What are you puttin on yer depity-sheriff airs for this mornin? You
sound like you was huntin for trouble.

Youve said it, returned Mr. Wallace, drily. Where is Luke?

At home in bed, sick with a cold; an thats where he has been since
yesterday afternoon, she answered. You can go over to the house an
make a call on him in bed, if yer business is that pressin; and then,
with a swift change from effrontery to curiosity in eyes and voice, she
leaned across the counter and whispered, Whats the trouble?

Exactly what you suspect, Mrs. Wattan maybe quite a lot more, he
replied, whispering in his turn from the force of example rather than by
intention. Now Ill just step over to the house an have a talk with
him.

Wait, she whispered, closing her fingers on the sleeve of his coat.
Tell me, have you got his number? Have you caught him? Tell me!

Wallace withdrew his sleeve from her grasp and turned and left the store
without another word. His face was drawn for a second with an expression
of sickening distaste, for he had seen, quick and sure as lightning,
exactly what the woman had in her mind. He knew that she salted away the
money which her husband corkscrewed out of the rural population; and he
had just now seen her as a rat that contemplates the advisability of
leaving a sinking ship. But she was a cautious sort of rat and wanted to
make dead sure that the ship was going down before she swarmed down the
anchor-chain and swam ashore. This nautical figure of thought came pat
to Mr. Wallace, for he had sailed four deep-sea voyages out of St. John
in his eighteenth and nineteenth years.

Mrs. Watt says hes sick abed with a cold, he informed Young Dan. It
may be so, for what would be the sense of her tellin that lie? Thats
the house. If youll stable the mare across there at Murphys, Ill go
to Wattsand you follow me as soon as youve stood the mare in the
stall. Open the front door an walk right in and up the stairs.

The deputy-sheriff found Luke Watt in bed. The store-keeper was very red
of face and watery of eye, and there were dark bruises on his brow.

Your wife said Id find you here, sick abed, said Wallace.

Well, she told ye the truth, replied Watt. What dye want, Archie?

You, Luke Watt. This is an official visit Im makin you.

Me? Official? Whos the joke on? Tell me when to laugh, will you?

Yes, you; and when the time to laugh comes Ill do it. Youre done.

And youre crazy! Im done, am I? Who dye reckon did me?

Wallace heard the front door open and close and then a light, slow step
on the stairs. He opened the bed-room door and looked out.

Luke Watt wants to know who did him, he said. Come along in and show
him, an then maybe hell believe me.

He returned to the side of the bed; and, a moment later, Young Dan
entered the room in his bulky muffling of furs and shut the door behind
him. Luke Watts face twitched. The trapper slipped out of his borrowed
coat and removed his cap and mittens and looked at the man in the bed.
Watt made a bluff at returning that lookbut it was a weak bluff. His
face twitched again, and he closed his eyes and sneezed. Young Dan
noticed the bruised forehead and was glad of it.

Id of marked you worse than that if it hadnt been for the snow and
the mitten on my hand, he said. But I guess you got enough!

He must of got some snow down his neck an caught cold from it, said
the deputy-sheriff. But if youd killed im, Dan Evans, you wouldnt of
done moren I would have done in your place. I wouldnt of blamed you.

What are you two talkin about, anyhow? demanded Watt, in a voice
husky with cold and emotion. And whos this here young jay?

Cut it out! retorted Wallace. I know the whole story, right back to
the fox you bought off of Jim Conley, and Ive seen the piece of paper
you used to figger out the price of it onthe price, mostly in gin. And
Ive got the gun in my pocket you used on Dan Evans here when you tried
to stop him from gettin into Harlow. You aint as cute as I thought you
were, but youre a long sight more dangerous. I never reckoned on you
tryin murder.

Its a lie! cried the other. Git out, or Ill have the law on you!

Not so fast, continued Wallace, calmly. I had a talk with your
friend, Tom Marl, about one oclock this mornin, after Id heard Dan
Evanss story. Tom was scared. He thought the two shots you fired had
hit the mark. Hes quite a talker, Tom Marl iswhen fear loosens his
tongue.

All the color went from Luke Watts face and again he closed his eyes.

Attempted robbery under arms, and assault with intent to killit would
make an exciting case, continued Wallace, slowly and clearly. It would
give the smart lawyers a fine chance to show their smartness, some
tryin to hang you and others tryin to save your neckbut the smartest
lawyers in the province couldnt save you from five years in pen. The
liquor case wont be near so exciting. Weve got you so cold there the
lawyers wouldnt find anything to argue about.

Watt continued to lie with his eyes tight shut, breathing heavily.

I guess Id have to make a charge against him for the assault and all,
and for firing two shots at my ribs, wouldnt I? said Young Dan, in an
unsteady voice. He felt unsteady. The sight of the big mans fear and
despair shook him strangely.

The storekeeper opened his eyes.

Aint you made the charge agin me? he cried. Then dont do it! Gimme
a chance! I was scart crazy. All I meant to do was to stop you an talk
you round. The gun kinder went off by accident. I swear it!

The deputy-sheriff sighed and lit a cigar.

How much did you get for that skin that you bought from Jim Conley?
asked Young Dan.

That skin?why, I aint sold it yet, answered Watt, thinking hard and
speaking slowly and uncertainly.

In that case, Ill take a look at it and value it, said Wallace.

You neednt trouble yerself, said the other, sullenly. I got five
hundred dollars for it.

Then you still owe the original owner of the skin four hundred an some
odd dollars, said the trapper.

Business is business, protested the man in bed. I bought the skin an
I sold it; an now I wisht it had been burnt to a cinder before I ever
seen it!

Give me four hundred dollars for Jim Conleys wife and kids and I wont
make that charge against you, said Young Dan.

The deputy-sheriff, who had been gazing reflectively out of the window,
turned at that with an air of decision and regarded the trapper with
level eyes.

Im goin to be downright and honest with both of you, he said. Its
nothing to me if you get four hundred dollars out of Watt for Conleys
wife and kids, or if you dont. Its no concern of mine. I dont care
what dicker you make with him, or if he keeps his end of the bargain or
goes back on itbut I tell you both that whatever happens, he is pinched
for selling gin. He is pinched good and hard for selling gin, and hell
go to jail for it, without the option of a fine, as sure as my name is
Wallace; and Ill put a constable into this house to guard him until
hes fit to go to jail and await his trial.

But I wont make the other charge, if youll give me four hundred for
Jim Conleys wife and babies, said the trapper to Watt.

Ill do that, replied Watt. Go over to the store an fetch my wife,
will you? She takes care of the money.

Young Dan went to the store and found a young woman with a red head in
charge. She informed him that Mrs. Watt had gone to the mill on business
and wouldnt be back for half an hour, perhaps. He returned to Luke
Watts bedroom with this information.

She aint got no business over to the mill, said Watt. Maybe shes in
the house somewheres. Take a look round the house for her, will you, an
tell her I want to see her quick.

So Young Dan left the bed-room again and searched the house high and
low. The only living thing he found in it was a cat in the kitchen; but
he saw melted snow here and there on the kitchen floor. He looked
closely at the damp marks and knew them for the tracks of feet shod in
arctics. He saw that the tracks began at the outer door of the kitchen,
crossed to the big dresser and returned to the door. He opened the door,
which was not locked, and looked into the cold shed. He saw a few small
films of pressed snow on the dusty floor of the shed, between the
shed-door and the kitchen-door. He went back to the big dresser and
gazed curiously and eagerly for a few seconds at its dish-laden shelves
and the closed doors of its cupboards, then returned to the room
upstairs and said that the house was empty.

But theres been a woman in the kitchen, he added. In and out again,
with snow on her feet. She wore arctic overboots, whoever she is.

Thats her! exclaimed Luke Watt weakly.

He got out of bed and put on trousers and coat over his nightshirt and
thrust his feet into slippers. He shivered and sat down on the edge of
the bed. His eyes of no particular color were miserable with dread.

Take a look in the stable, he whispered. See if my trottin mares
there.

The trapper went out to the stable, by way of the kitchen and the shed.
The stall was empty. The harness had gone from its pegs. There were
fresh tracks of hoofs and runners in the snow in front of the stable
door.

She must of tied the bells, he said. She seems to know what shes
about, whatever it is. And I wonder what it is?

He went back to Watt and the deputy-sheriff with the news that the
trotting mare was gone from the stable, harness and pung and all.

Luke Watt turned a tragic, despairing and murderous gaze on Mr. Wallace.
You fool! he cried, hysterically. Why couldnt you keep yer silly
mouth shut! You told her how yed come to pinch me, an how I hadnt a
chance to git clearan so shes up an lit out with all the money!
Thats what shes done! Lit out with every dollar!

With that explosion the storekeeper sank back across the bed and covered
his face with his hands. The deputy-sheriff and the trapper exchanged
embarrassed glances.

Hes lying, whispered Wallace. Hes tryin to fool you, Dan. There
aint a woman in the world would do a trick like that on her husband;
and Mrs. Watt couldnt even if she wanted to.

He leaned over Luke Watt and shook him roughly by a shoulder.

Whered you bank your money? he asked.

I didnt bank it nowhere, mumbled Watt, still with his face in his
hands. She didnt bank it, neither. She salted it away.

Whered she salt it away?

I dunno.

Youre lying, Luke Wattor youre the biggest an softest boob I ever
heard tell of.

Ill bet she kept it somewhere in the dresser in the kitchen, said
Young Dan. Thats where the tracks led toto the dresser and out
again.

The storekeeper jumped to his feet and ran heavily from the room, crying
Lets go look. The others followed him close.

Young Dan took charge of the investigation of the dresser. All the
dishes were removed from the shelves and every inch of woodwork was
searched for a hidden drawer or sliding panelbut all in vain. Luke Watt
sat down beside the stove and shivered and wept. Then Young Dan and Mr.
Wallace emptied the four pot-closets in the bottom of the dresser of
dozens of pots, pans, sauce-pans and frying-pans, and Young Dan crawled
into each in turn and rapped here and there and everywhere with
enquiring knuckles. In the fourth closet he found his reward. Without
withdrawing his head he passed back and out a section of the bottom of
the closet. Mr. Wallace took the piece of dry pine board in his hand and
showed it to Luke Watt. Luke stared at it and ceased his weeping. Then a
section of board from the floor of the kitchen appeared from beneath the
trappers elbow. He withdrew his head and shoulders from the closet a
few seconds later and squatted back on his heels.

Empty, he said.

Yes, the hiding-place beneath the floor was empty. The deputy-sheriff
found it empty. Even Luke Watts hungry fingers failed to find anything
in it.

An if there was a dollar in it there was twenty thousand, whispered
Watt, in a stunned voice.

There dont live another woman in the world would play a trick like
that on her man, said Mr. Wallace. No matter how bad he was, she
wouldnt play him down like that. It beats anything I ever heard of.

Reckon yer right, replied the storekeeper, listlessly. Eliza aint no
ordinary woman. You hadnt ought to told her yer business with me.

He sounded like a man talking in his sleep.

I guess youre in trouble enough, Luke Watt, said Young Dan. Well, as
far as Im concerned, youre no worse off than if you hadnt tried to
stop me with a gun. Thats forgotten.

The dazed storekeeper went back to bed; and Archie Wallace supplied a
cook and a muscular constable to feed him and hold him until he was in
fit health to be removed to the county jail.

On their way through to Danl Evanss farm behind the long-gaited
strawberry mare, the deputy-sheriff and Young Dan bought as much food as
two good men could pack a days journey from Amos Bissing at the Bend.
Mr. Bissing was deeply impressed by Young Dans company and appearance.
He asked a great many questions and received a good many answersbut not
a single answer to his questions as to the deputy-sheriffs reasons for
touring the country in Young Dans company. He could see easily enough
by the manners of the two that their relations were entirely friendly.

When the strawberry mare passed the kitchen windows of the Evans farm,
and Young Dan was recognized by every member of the family and Mr.
Wallace was recognized by the father, amazement and apprehension flamed
in every heart.

Hes a policeman, I tell ye! exclaimed Danl for the third time in
quick succession, flattered by the panicky effect of his words. Hes
the sheriff from Harlow. Young Dans been too smart for his own good at
last, I callate. Them fool books an his Tangler brains has tripped him
by the heels at last. Wonder what he done?

Then the kitchen door opened and Young Dan entered with the tall man
close behind him. He threw aside his cap and embraced his mother; and at
the first clear glimpse of his face she knew that her Daniel senior had
been mistaken again.

They remained at the farm for supper, and the night and breakfast. Danl
Evans was greatly relieved, of course, to know that his son was not an
offender against any lawbut he was not happy. Everything was too right
for his complete enjoyment. There was too much talk on the
deputy-sheriffs part to suit him, of the virtues of Bill Tangler and
the great thing Young Dan had done; and Young Dan, was too well pleased
with himself and the deputy-sheriff; and Mrs. Evans made altogether too
much of both the visitors and had more to say about the intellectual
qualities of her own family than could be expected to please a husband
of Danls disposition. When he knocked and belittled and sneered, he
was either ignored entirely or bluntly contradicted. When he advanced
the theory that Young Dan had been guilty of an error in judgment in
jumping so quick at Luke Watt, and cited the two bullet-holes in the
youths coat as proof of the mistake, the deputy-sheriff thought that he
was joking and laughed heartily.

Youre a dry humorist, Mr. Evans, he exclaimed. The driest I ever
met. Thats goodthat about the holes in Dans coat. You sure do give a
new and uncommon slant to a thing.

This puzzled Danl, giving him food for silent thought to last him for
the remainder of the evening.

Young Dan and Mr. Wallace set out for the Right Prong country after an
early breakfast, on their snow-shoes, with forty-pound packs on their
shoulders, leaving the strawberry mare in Danl Evanss charge. It was a
windless clear day, and the snow was well settled. Young Dan led the way
at his best pacebut he did not have to stop once to let Archie Wallace
catch up to him. The fact was, he had to put on an extra spurt every now
and then to keep the tails of his snowshoes from being stepped on.
Thats the kind of man Archie Wallace was.

They found both old men at the camp in fine spirits and Andy Maces
rheumatism greatly improved. Andy cooked a masterpiece of a supper; and
after supper Archie Wallace told the story of Young Dans adventures
with Luke Watt in his best style. At the conclusion of the narrative,
Pete Sabatis turned the glance of his single eye from the face of Young
Dan to that of Andy Mace and slowly nodded his head twice.

Guess you size im up right, Andy, he said.

Young Dan blushed with pleasure, yet pretended not to have seen or heard
this passage of intelligence. To be accepted as an able man by Pete
Sabatis and to measure up to the heroic standards of earlier
generations, these were triumphs which might well expand the heart and
redden the cheek of even an older man than Young Dan.

After breakfast the deputy-sheriff and Young Dan went north to Jim
Conleys cabin, heavy-laden with their contributions toward the support
of that worthless fellows wife and children. Just before coming into
view of the cabin, Mr. Wallace halted and the trapper took to the brush
beside the trail. Wallace stood motionless for five minutes, then
advanced. Within a second of sighting the little hut of logs he glimpsed
the swift flash of a face at the little window. He went forward without
haste and knocked on the door. It was opened to him by the woman.

Good mornin, mam, he said, standing his rifle against the edge of
the door and lowering his pack to the threshold. Heres some grub for
you, with the compliments of Dan Evans.

The woman stared at him, motionless and silent.

Is Jim round anywheres handy? he asked. Id like to speak to him.

It was him sent ye herethat young fool, Dan Evans! she exclaimed.
Why dont he mind his own business? Cant ye let Jim be? Hes workin
fine now that the gins all gone. Cant ye leave him be?

Whats he workin at, mam?

Trappin, thats what.

But whose traps?

Her face paled. Quick as a flash she reached out an arm, snatched his
cased rifle from where it stood and stepped back into the room. Mr.
Wallace smiled, raised the pack of provisions from the threshold,
carried it into the cabin and closed the door behind him. He crossed the
room in four strides and opened another door; and there stood Conley,
facing it, with both hands held high in air and a rifle in one hand.
Behind him stood Young Dan.

Come along in, said the deputy-sheriff.

Conley obeyed; and young Dan came close at his heels and shut the door.
Wallace took the rifle from Conley and his own from the woman. Then he
turned to Young Dan and said, Youve got something to say to these
folks, I believe. Fire away.

Its this, said Young Dan, looking coldly from the man to the woman.
Im just about sick of supplying you with grub. A wolf would feel more
gratitude than either of you. So this is the last time; and if ever I
call again with the deputy-sheriff, therell be trouble for you. Weve
arrested Luke Watt for selling gin, and he is going to jail for it. Oh,
yes, I know all about that fox skin! Stick to yer own trap-lines from
now on, Jim Conley, and trade yer furs for food instead of hard liquor,
and Ill leave you alone. But make one more break at me or my traps, and
Ill land you where you can talk it over with Luke Watt. Heres more
grubthe last I bother to tote in to youand thats all Ive got to say.
Come along, Mr. Wallace. Lets get out into the fresh air quick.

They turned away and left the man and woman and bewildered children
standing silent and motionless.

I didnt suspect it was in you to be so sharp with them, remarked
Archie Wallace. What riled you?

Conley tried to slip a knife into me after hed put up his hands,
replied Young Dan.

Well, I reckon theyll be good from now on, so far as youre
concerned, said Wallace. You scared em. You pretty nigh scared me.

They were half-way back to Bill Tanglers camp when the deputy-sheriff
halted and lit a cigar.

Youre a wizard, Dan Evans, he said. A trapper needs to be smart, but
not as far-sighted an clear-thinkin as you. The Government will be
glad to pay you for anything you doso will you lend me a hand now an
then, when Im up against something too big for me to swing alone?

Sure, said Young Dan.

Thats a bargain! exclaimed Mr. Wallace; and they shook hands there in
the white trail.

[Illustration: "'I INTEND RESIGNING MY COMMISSION, SIR'" (_See page
15_)



  HEMMING

  THE ADVENTURER



  BY

  THEODORE ROBERTS.

  AUTHOR OF "BROTHERS OF PERIL," ETC.



  _ILLUSTRATIONS BY A. G. LEARNED._



  LONDON:
  WARD, LOCK & CO., LIMITED,
  1906.




  A Dedication
  TO ONE WHO BROUGHT
  THE COLOUR OF REALITY BACK
  TO LIFE AT A TIME WHEN LIFE WAS LIKE
  A PICTURE, AND THE FACES OF MY FRIENDS WERE
  LESS REAL THAN THE FACES OF MY DREAMING.  TO ONE
  WHOSE SWEET INTEREST IN MY STORIES MADE IT SEEM WORTH
  WHILE TO RECALL MY AIMLESS ADVENTURES.  TO ONE WHOSE
  GENTLE MINISTRATIONS TURNED A WEARY SICKNESS INTO A
  HOLIDAY, AND WIPED OUT THE MEMORY OF PAST PAIN.  TO ONE
  WHO TAUGHT ME THAT ROMANCE LIES NOT ALL IN THE MAKING
  OF NEW LANDFALLS AND THE SIGHTING OF NEW
  MOUNTAIN-TOPS.  TO HER WHO READS THIS PAGE WITH
  UNDERSTANDING, AND A QUICKENING OF
  THE PULSE, THIS STORY OF HEMMING
  THE ADVENTURER IS
  LOVINGLY DEDICATED

  1903 T. R.




  CONTENTS


  PART ONE

  CHAPTER

  I. Captain Hemming Faces a Change of Life
  II. Hemming Meets with a Strange Reception
  III. Hemming Visits the Manager of the Syndicate
  IV. The Advent of Mr. O'Rourke and His Servant
  V. The Adventurers Dispense With Mr. Nunez
  VI. Hemming Hears of the Villain
  VII. An Elderly Champion
  VIII. Hemming Undertakes a Dignified Work
  IX. O'Rourke Tells a Sad Story
  X. Lieutenant Ellis Is Concerned
  XI. Hemming Draws His Back Pay


  PART TWO

  I. The Unsuspected City
  II. The Sporting President
  III. The Post of Honour.--The Secretary's Affair
  IV. The Thing That Happened
  V. Chance in Pernambuco
  VI. Cuddlehead Decides on an Adventure
  VII. Hemming Learns Something about His Army
  VIII. Captain Santosa Visits His Superior Officer
  IX. Mr. Cuddlehead Arrives
  X. The First Shot
  XI. The Colonel's Ultimatum
  XII. O'Rourke to the Rescue
  XIII. The Unexpected Sailor
  XIV. The Attack
  XV. Rest in Pernambuco


  PART THREE

  I. The Real Girl
  II. A New Restlessness
  III. A Rolling Stone
  IV. "The Dear, Dear Witchery of Song"
  V. An Uncanny Guest
  VI. The Bachelor Uncle to the Rescue
  VII. Hemming Receives His Sailing Orders from a Master Not to Be Denied
  VIII. Hemming Would Put His Dreams To The Proof
  IX. To Part No More
  X. A New Command




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"'I intend resigning my commission, sir'" (_See page 15_)
_Frontispiece_

"Several days later Miss Travers wrote to Hemming"

"The door came in with a rending, sidelong fall"

"'I have decided, sir, to stick to scribbling'"

"At that moment Molly tripped into the room"




PART ONE



  HEMMING,
  THE ADVENTURER



CHAPTER I.

CAPTAIN HEMMING FACES A CHANGE OF LIFE

The colonel sat in Captain Hemming's room.  He looked about at the
snug furnishings, and the photographs above the chimney.  Even the
row of polished spurs on their rack against the wall, and the line of
well-shone boots and shoes at the head of the bed, could not do away
with the homelike air of the room.

"Even in Dublin, a man with something over his pay can make himself
comfortable, in seven months," mused the colonel.  Being a bachelor
himself, he liked the way things were arranged.  For instance, the
small book-shelf above the bed, with its freight of well-thumbed
volumes, tobacco-jar, and match-box, appealed to him.  He selected a
cigarette from an open box at his elbow, and, lighting it, sighed
contentedly.  In reaching back to deposit the burnt match on an
ash-tray, his hand upset a stack of folded papers and spilled them on
the floor.

"The devil!" he exclaimed, and, doubling up, scooped for the nearest.

What's this, he wondered, as a yard or two of narrow, printed matter
unrolled from his hand.  He was a stranger to galley-proofs.  He
looked at the top of the upper strip, and saw, in heavy, black type,
"The Colonel and the Lady."  Then he settled back in the chair,
crossed his thin, tight-clad legs, and smoothed the proof.  Ten
minutes later Hemming's orderly entered and mended the fire; but the
colonel did not look up.  The orderly retired.  The clock on the
chimneypiece ticked away the seconds all unheeded.  The shadows
lengthened at the windows, and at last the colonel straightened
himself, and replaced the papers.  He smiled.

"Sly old Hemming," he remarked, and laughed outright.  "He shouldn't
show us up like that," he said, "but it's a good yarn.  Wonder if he
will lend it to me to finish to-night?"

Just then Captain Hemming entered.

By this time the room was dusk with the twilight of early spring.  He
did not sight the colonel immediately, and, going over to a wardrobe,
hung up his cap and greatcoat.  He was in "undress" uniform--his blue
serge tunic somewhat shabby, but his riding-breeches and high,
spurred boots smart and new.  The colonel coughed.

Though the captain's greeting was prompt and polite, it did not hide
his surprise.

"I dropped in to speak about Tomilson--he seems in a bad way," the
other explained.  Tomilson was a full private--in both rank and
condition.

Hemming advised leniency in this case.  He had a soft heart for the
men, in spite of his abrupt diction, and the uncompromising glare of
his single eye-glass.  When the commanding officer was about to take
his departure, the captain asked him to wait a minute.  His manner
was as cool as ever.

"I intend resigning my commission, sir.  I decided on the course some
days ago, and meant to speak to you after parade to-morrow," he said.

"Bless me," exclaimed the colonel, "what the devil have you been up
to?"

The other smiled,--a somewhat thin smile,--and replied that he had
not disgraced the regiment, or done anything low.  "But I'm down to
my pay again," he exclaimed, "and I can't live on that."

"Why not?  Have you ever tried?" inquired the colonel.

Hemming did not answer the question, but waited, with his hands
behind his back, and his face toward the fast darkening windows.

"I'm sorry for it," said the older man, at last.  "You are a good
officer,--forgive my saying so,--and--and the mess swears by you.  I
hope you have suffered no serious misfortune."

The captain laughed wanly.

"It seems rather serious to me," he replied.  "I've come to the end
of my little pile."

"The second, I believe," remarked the colonel.

Hemming nodded.

"It beats me," exclaimed his superior, and looked as if an
explanation would be welcome.

"You would understand, sir, if you were as big a fool as I have been.
Good nature, without common business sense to guide it, gets away
with more money than viciousness."

He stared gravely at the reclining colonel.  "At last I have learned
my lesson," he concluded, "and it is this--put not your trust in
cads."

The colonel laughed uneasily, and quitted the room without asking for
the loan of the proof-sheets.  Hemming sat down in the vacated chair.
His face now wore a pleasanter expression.

"Thank God, I'm not afraid of work," he said, "but may the devil fly
away with that cad Penthouse.  How can a blood-relation of Molly's be
such a sneaking, mealy-mouthed little cur?  Now, while I am lying
here winged, thanks to my childish generosity and his beastliness, he
is skipping around in London, on two months' leave.  Herbert Hemming
is done with the ways of lambs and idiots."  Jumping to his feet, he
went to the door and shouted for his man.  A few minutes later, with
the candles glowing softly on sword and photograph, spur and
book-back, he dressed for dinner.

That night the mess found him more talkative than usual.  But he left
early, for his own quarters.  The groups in the anteroom thinned
gradually, as the men went about their various concerns, some to
their rooms, and some to the town, and one across the square to the
colonel's quarters, where the colonel's youngest sister awaited him.
This sister was a thorn in the colonel's flesh.  She would not let
him smoke his pipe in the drawing-room (though he was sure she smoked
cigarettes there), and he heartily hoped his junior major would marry
her.  The junior major hoped so too, and, with this hope in his
breast, took his departure, leaving Spalding, a subaltern, and Major
O'Grady alone by the piano.

O'Grady balanced his smouldering cigarette on the edge of the
music-stand, and strummed a few erratic bars.

"The other chaps must have suspected something," said Spalding.  "I
wondered why they all cleared out."

"What are ye doing here, ye impudent young divil?  Should think ye'd
skeedaddle down-town, now that Penthouse is in London, and ye've got
a chance with the lady," cried the stout Irish major.  The
subaltern's boyish face took on an ugly expression.

"Penthouse--that bounder," he sneered.

"I must admit that his manners are a trifle airy," returned O'Grady,
"but the same can be truly said of most subs of this glorious age."

"I'm not objecting to his manners, major, and I'm not defending my
own," said Spalding.  "I'm simply naming him a bounder."

O'Grady took up his cigarette, and turned his back on the keyboard.

"What are ye kicking about?" he inquired.

"Well," replied Spalding, anxiously examining the ceiling, "I happen
to know things about him."

"Ye're a gossip, me boy, that's what ye are," cried the major, "and
of all contemptible things, the worst is a male gossip.  What do ye
happen to know about him, me boy?"

A faint smile played across the lieutenant's upturned face; but the
impatient major did not notice it.

"To begin with, he's some sort of cousin to a Miss Travers, an
English girl whom Hemming is in love with," said Spalding.

"Then you object to him on purely social grounds," interrupted the
Irishman.

"Oh, shut up, and let me tell my tale.  Social grounds be shot--Miss
Travers is daughter of a lord bish-hop.  Penthouse is son of a
baronet.  What I'm getting at is that good old Hemming, just because
this chap is related to his girl, has looked after him like a
dry-nurse for more than a year.  That is right enough.  But--and this
is not known by any one but me--Hemming backed a lot of his paper,
and for the last two months he has been paying the piper.  Once upon
a time, in the memory of man, Hemming had some money, but I'll eat my
helmet if he has any now."

"How d'ye know all this?" asked O'Grady, letting his fat cigarette
smoulder its life away unheeded.  Spalding touched his eyes lightly
with his finger-tips.

"Saw," he said.

The major gave vent to his feelings in muttered oaths, all the while
keeping an observant eye upon his companion.

"I'll wager now that Hemming has some good old Irish blood in him,"
he remarked.

"Why do you think that?" asked Spalding, deliberately yawning.

"His generosity leads me to think so.  There are other officers of
infantry regiments who'd be better off to-day, but for their kind
hearts and Irish blood."  The major sighed windily as he made this
statement.

"Methinks you mean Irish whiskey," retorted Spalding.  With dignity
O'Grady arose from the piano-stool.

"I'll not listen to any more of your low gossip," he said, and
started for the door, in a hurry to carry the news to any one he
might find at home.

"You needn't mention my name, sir," called Spalding, over his
shoulder.  His superior officer left the room without deigning a
reply.




CHAPTER II.

HEMMING MEETS WITH A STRANGE RECEPTION

Herbert Hemming sat alone in his room, while his brother officers
sought their pleasure in divers companies.  His writing-table was
drawn close to the fire.  His scarlet mess-jacket made a vivid spot
of colour, in the softly illuminated room.  He was busily occupied
with the proofs of "The Colonel and the Lady," when his man rapped at
the door and entered.

"Nothing more," said the captain, without looking up.  The soldier
saluted, but did not go.  Presently his master's attention was
awakened by the uneasy creaking of his boots.

"Well, what do you want?"

"Me mother is very ill, sir."

"I'm not a doctor, Malloy."

"I wasn't thinkin' of insultin' you, sir."

Hemming sighed, and laid down his pen.

"I have found you a satisfactory servant," he said, "also a frightful
liar."

"I must confess to you, sir," replied the man, "that I was lyin' last
month about me father,--he's been dead as St. Pathrick this seven
year,--but to-night I'm tellin' you the truth, sir, so help me--"

"Never mind that," interrupted Hemming.

Malloy was silent.

"So your mother is very ill?" continued the captain.

"Yes, sir,--locomotive attacks, sir."

"And poor, I take it?"

"Yes, sir,--four bob a week."

Hemming felt in his pockets and drew out a sovereign.

"Sorry it's so little," he said, "but if you give me her address
to-morrow I'll call and see her."

"God bless you, sir," said the man.  He took the money, and hesitated
beside the table.

Hemming glanced at him inquiringly.

"Beggin' your pardon, sir, it beats me how you knows when I'm lyin'
and when I'm tellin' the truth," exclaimed the orderly.

"I'm learning things by experience.  Good night, Malloy."

Alone again, Hemming made short work of his proofs.  After sealing
them into a yellow envelope, and inscribing thereon the address of a
big New York weekly (whose editor had proved partial to his sketches
and stories of "doings" in the Imperial Army), he produced some of
the regimental stationery and began a letter to Miss Travers.  It was
no easy undertaking--the writing of this particular letter.  After
struggling for some minutes with the first sentence, he leaned back
in his chair and fell into retrospection.  His age was now
twenty-nine years.  He had done with Sandhurst at twenty-one, and had
been in the army ever since; had seen more than his share of foreign
service, and two seasons of border-scrapping in Northern India.  He
had gone ahead in his chosen profession, despite a weakness for
reading poetry in bed and writing articles descriptive of people and
things he knew.  During his father's lifetime his allowance (though
he was but a third son) was ample, and even enabled him to play polo,
and shortly after his father's death an almost unknown great-aunt had
left him a modest little sum--not much of a fortune, but a very
comfortable possession.  Two years previous to his present troubles
he had fallen in love.  So had the girl.  A year ago he had proposed
and been accepted.  He had, for her sake, fathered a reckless,
impecunious subaltern, by name Penthouse, lending him money and
endorsing his notes, and now he was stripped bare to his pay.  If he
had never met the girl, things would not look so bad, for certain
papers and magazines had begun to buy his stories.  By sitting up to
it and working hard, he felt that he could make more as a writer than
as a soldier.  But the idea of giving up the girl sent a sickening
chill through his heart.  Surely she would understand, and cheer him
up the new path.  But it was with a heavy heart that he returned to
the writing of the letter.  Slowly, doggedly he went through with it,
telling of his loss of fortune, through helping a person whom he
would not name, and of his hopes and plans for the future.  He told
of the adventurous position he had accepted, but the day before, with
an American Newspaper Syndicate--a billet that would necessitate his
almost immediate departure for Greece.  The pain of his
disappointment crept, all unnoticed by him, into the style of his
writing, and made the whole letter sound strained and unnatural.

By the time the letter was sealed and ready for the mail, Hemming was
tired out.  He flung himself on the bed, unhooked the collar of his
mess-jacket (they hooked at the collar a few years ago), and,
lighting his pipe, lay for some time in unhappy half-dreaming.  He
knew, for, at the last, young Penthouse had not been careful to hide
his cloven foot, that he might just as well expect another great-aunt
to leave him another lump of money as to look for any reimbursement
from the source of his misfortune.  The fellow was bad, he mused, but
just how bad his friends and the world must find out for themselves.
Of course he would give Molly a hint to that effect, when he saw her.
He had not done so in the letter, because it had been hard enough to
write, without that.

Hemming went on duty next day, wearing, to the little world of the
regiment, his usual alert and undisturbed expression.  Shortly before
noon he wrote and forwarded a formal resignation of his commission.
By dinner-time the word that he had given up the service had reached
every member of the mess.  Spalding's story had also made the rounds,
in one form or another (thanks to Major O'Grady, that righteous enemy
to gossip), and the colonel alone was ignorant of it.  During dinner
little was said about Hemming's sudden move.  All felt it more or
less keenly; the colonel grieved over the loss of so capable an
officer, and the others lamented the fact that a friend and a
gentleman was forced to leave their mess because one cad happened to
be a member of it.  Hemming felt their quiet sympathy.  Even the
waiters tending him displayed an increased solicitousness.

Hemming remained in Dublin a week after resigning his commission.  He
had a good deal of business to attend to, and some important letters
to receive--one from the American Syndicate, containing a check, and
at least two from Miss Travers.  It had been the lady's custom, ever
since their engagement, to write him twice a week.  Three were now
overdue.  The American letter came, with its terse and satisfactory
typewritten instructions and narrow slip of perforated paper, but the
English missive failed to put in an appearance.  He tried not to
worry during the day, and, being busy, succeeded fairly well, but at
night, being defenceless, care visited him even in his dreams.
Sometimes he saw the woman he loved lying ill--too ill to hold a pen.
Sometimes he saw her with a new unsuspected look in her eyes, turning
an indifferent face upon his supplications.  He lost weight in those
few days, and Spalding (who, with the others, thought his only
trouble the loss of his money) said that but for the work he had in
getting a fair price for his pony, his high-cart, and his extra pairs
of riding-boots, he would have blown his brains out.

On his last night in Dublin his old regiment gave a dinner in his
honour.  Civilians were there, and officers from every branch of the
service, and when Major O'Grady beheld Hemming (which did not happen
until late in the dinner), clothed in the unaccustomed black and
white, with his medal with two clasps pinned on his coat, he tried to
sing something about an Irish gentleman, and burst into tears.

"There's not a drop of the craychure in his blood," said Spalding,
across the table.

"But he's the boy with the warm heart," whimpered the major.

"And the open hand," said the subaltern.

"The same has been the ruin of many of us," replied O'Grady.

It was well for Lieutenant Penthouse that he did not return to Dublin
in time to attend that dinner.

Hemming knew a score of private houses in London where he would be
welcome for a night or a month, but in his bitter mood he ignored the
rights of friendship and went to a small hotel in an unfashionable
part of the town.  As soon as he had changed from his rough tweeds
into more suitable attire, he started, in a cab, for the Travers
house.  The bishop was dead, and the widow, preferring London to
Norfolk, spent every season in town.  Hemming was sure of finding
some one at home, though he trembled at the memory of his evil
dreams.  Upon reaching the house he dismissed the cab.  The maid who
opened the door recognized him, and showed him into the drawing-room.

"I hope every one is well," he said, pausing on the threshold.

"Yes, sir," replied the maid, looking surprised at the question.  She
had seen Captain Hemming many times, but never before had he
addressed her.

It seemed to Hemming that he waited hours in the narrow, heavily
furnished room.  He could not sit still.  At last he got to his feet,
and, crossing to a corner table, examined the photographs of some
people he knew.  He wondered where his had gone to--the full-length
portrait by Bettel, in field-uniform.  He looked for it everywhere,
an uncomfortable curiosity pricking him.  Turning from his search, he
saw Miss Travers watching him.  He took a step toward her, and
stopped short.  Her face was white, her eyes were dark with the
shadow of pain.  Something had put out the familiar illumination that
love had lighted so gloriously.

"Molly," whispered the man.  His hands, extended at first sight of
her, dropped impotently at his side.  "For God's sake, what is the
matter?" he cried.  His honest gray eyes asked the question as
plainly.  Hers wavered, and looked beyond him in a pitiful, strained
gaze.

"Why do you ask?  You surely know," she said.

He could not speak for a moment.  His brain, in a whirl of
apprehension, groped for some clue whereby it might find
understanding.

"I know nothing," he said, at last, "save that I am horribly afraid
of something I do not understand--of your silence and the change in
you."  He paused for a moment, scanning her averted face.  "And now I
am a poor man," he added.

At that a faint red stole into her cheeks.  He drew nearer and laid a
hand quickly and tenderly upon her shoulder.

"Dear girl, can that weigh against me?" he asked, scarce above his
breath.  She moved from his touch with a gesture that sent the blood
ringing back to brain and heart.  The madness of the righteous anger
ebbed, leaving him cool and observant.

"I must beg your pardon for intruding, and now I shall go," he said.
"It was well worth the loss of a few thousands of pounds--to find the
real nature of your love."

He passed her with squared shoulders and sneering lip, and strode
briskly toward the door.

"Wait," she cried, "I do not understand you."  Her voice contained a
new note.

He turned on the threshold and bowed.

"You have known me long enough," he said.

"Yes," she replied.  He stood in the doorway and stared at her.

"If I am dreaming, then wake me, dear.  Surely you love me?"

His voice was tense.  He moved as if to approach her again.

"I have learned of your other life--of your living lie," she cried,
weakly.

"My other life," he repeated, smiling gently.

"Yes," she said, "from my cousin.  It was his duty.  Tell me it is
not true."

He saw the tears in her eyes.  He marked the supplication in her
voice.  But he did not move from the threshold.

"From Penthouse?" he inquired.

She did not answer him.  She stood with one hand raised to her
breast, and a world of entreaty in her gaze.

"I thought," said Hemming, coldly, "that you loved me.  I thought
that when a woman loved the man who loves her, that she also trusted
him.  But I am very ignorant, considering my age."

He took his hat and stick from the rack in the hall, and let himself
out of the front door.  He stood for a few seconds on the steps and
looked up and down the street.  A cab rolled up to the curb.  After
drawing on his gloves and adjusting his monocle, he stepped into the
cab and quietly gave the name of his club to the man behind.

The cab bowled along the quiet, respectable street.

"Stop here," cried Hemming, when they had reached the corner, and as
the horse slid to a standstill he stepped out, and went up to a
heavily dressed young man on the pavement.  The stranger did not see
him, and held on in the direction from which Hemming had just come.

"Excuse me--a word," said Hemming.

The other halted.  His heavy, handsome face whitened under its
unhealthy skin.

"Ah, how do, Hemming," he said.

Hemming took the extended hand.  They stood about the same height.
Hemming retained his grip of the other's hand.

"I am somewhat pressed for time," he said, "so you'll forgive me if I
begin immediately."

He jerked Mr. Penthouse toward him with a downward wrench of his
right arm, and, with his stick in his left hand, he administered a
short and severe caning.

"I'm a-waitin' for you, guvnor," called the cabby.

Leaving Mr. Penthouse seated upon the pavement, dazed and
blasphemous, Hemming returned to the cab and drove away.




CHAPTER III.

HEMMING VISITS THE MANAGER OF THE SYNDICATE

Hemming's club was a favourite resort of military and naval men
stationed near town, or home on leave.  He met half a dozen whom he
knew more or less intimately.  All had something to say about his
change of career, but presently he escaped them, and sought a quiet
corner of the reading-room, where he could smoke and stare at the
latest papers.  Reading was out of the question.  He might as well
have tried to sing.  Several times he was ready to leave the club and
return to Miss Travers, but the memory of the movement she had made
when he had touched her shoulder kept him crushed in his chair.  He
dined at the club, and drank more than was his custom.  The sound
wine brought colour back to his cheeks.

A youngster, who had been stationed in Halifax, Nova Scotia, for a
year past, came over to his table with an American magazine in his
hand.

"Do you know, old chap, your stories are quite the rage in Halifax,"
he said.  "I notice, though, that the fellows here do not know what
you are up to at all.  One soon leaves the trick of reading the
magazines on the other side."

This unexpected word for his literary work cheered Hemming
considerably.  He invited the youth to seat himself and have a cigar.
Soon he found himself telling his admirer something of his
aspirations.

When Anderson of the Royal Engineers came in, he found Hemming and
the lieutenant on leave from Canada still talking across the table.
Anderson was Hemming's senior by some four or five years, but they
had been friends since childhood.  After their greeting, Anderson
said:

"Have you seen Penthouse?"

"Yes, I met him about five o'clock," replied Hemming.

Anderson's face brightened, and he slapped his knee with his broad
hand.

"I ran across him in an apothecary's shop a few hours ago, and, as I
had just heard of your arrival, I wondered if you had met him," he
said.  "You see," he continued, "I have had my eye on him of late.
The Travers and I are still very good friends, you know."

"This sounds very interesting," broke in the lieutenant.  "What is it
all about?"

"I hardly know myself," answered Hemming.

The lieutenant wished them good night, shook hands cordially with
both, and, after assuring Hemming that he would watch eagerly for
everything he wrote, left the dining-room.

"Williams seems a good sort," remarked Hemming.

Anderson did not answer.  He looked as if he were thinking unusually
hard.

"I suppose you'll be in town for a while," he said.

"I leave to-morrow for Greece.  I'm a newspaper correspondent now,"
replied Hemming.

"You must stay a few days," said the engineer.  "A few days will do
it.  You have no right to fly off the handle like that."

"Like what?" asked the other.

"My dear boy, I have known for a week just how it would be, and now I
am in rather a hole myself," said Anderson.

"Have you been living a double life?" inquired Hemming, with a sneer.

"Great heavens!" exclaimed the lusty sapper, "do you mean to
say?--but no, I only told the lady that Penthouse was a rotten little
liar.  Strong language, I must admit."

Hemming laughed shortly.

"You must not trouble yourself too much, Dicky, for it's really not
worth while," he said.

A little later Hemming excused himself to his friend on the plea that
he had to return to his hotel, and write some letters.

"I am my own master no longer," he said.

"I think you are just beginning," replied Anderson, drily.

Hemming looked into the future, saw his body journeying, vagrant as
the wind, and his hand at a hundred adventures, but never an hour of
freedom.  He went down the wide steps and into the street with hell
and longing in his heart.

Hemming spent two weeks in Greece.  He wrote a few descriptive
stories for his syndicate, and then crossed into Turkey, where he was
offered a commission.  He wired that fighting was certain.  The
syndicate thought otherwise, and called him across the world to see
or make trouble in South America.  He cursed their stupidity and
started, spending only a few hours in England, and taking ship in
Liverpool for New York.  Arriving in that city, he and his
possessions (and he carried a full outfit) journeyed in a cab to an
old and respectable hotel on Broadway.  The fare he had to pay opened
his eyes.  But what could he do beyond staring the cabby out of
countenance with his baleful, glaring eye-glass?  At the hotel, they
were kind enough to take him for a duke in disguise.  Next morning he
found his way to the offices of the New York News Syndicate, in a
high gray building on Fulton Street.  He scrambled into one of the
great caged elevators, close on the heels of a stout gentleman in a
yellow spring overcoat and silk hat.  The lift was lighted by several
small electric bulbs.  The air was warm, and heavy with the scent of
stale cigarette smoke.

"New York News Syndicate," said Hemming to the attendant.

"Third floor," said the man, and up they shot and stopped.  The iron
grating was rolled back.  Hemming stepped out into a cool,
white-floored hall, and, turning, found the stout gentleman at his
heels.

"I think you are Captain Hemming," said the stranger, "and I am quite
sure I am Benjamin Dodder."

"Ah! the manager of the syndicate," exclaimed Hemming, waggling Mr.
Dodder's extended hand, and looking keenly into his wide,
clean-shaven face.  Dodder was a much younger man than his figure
would lead one to suppose.  Hemming thought his face far too heavy
for his bright, good-natured brown eyes.

"I got in last night, and came 'round for orders," explained Hemming.

"That was good of you," replied the manager, looking gratified.  He
led the way through several large rooms, where clerks and
stenographers were hard at work, to his private office.  He paused at
the door, and turning, said to a clerk with a glaring red necktie and
beautifully parted hair: "Ask Mr. Wells to step into my room when he
comes.  Tell him Captain Herbert Hemming has arrived."  A dozen keen,
inquiring faces were lifted from desk and machine, and turned toward
the new correspondent.

Within the manager's office were expensively upholstered chairs,
leather-topped tables, polished bookcases, and half a dozen admirably
chosen engravings, and above the grate many photographs, with
signatures scrawled across them.  The carpet underfoot was soft and
thick.

"Try this chair, sir," invited Mr. Dodder.

Hemming sank into it, and balanced his hat and stick on his knees;
Mr. Dodder snatched them from him and placed them on his table.  Then
he pulled off his coat and expanded his chest.

"Now I begin to feel like working," he remarked, with youthful gusto.

"What an extraordinary chap," thought Hemming.

Dodder opened a drawer in his table, and took out a box of cigars.
Hemming recognized the label, and remembered that they cost, in
London, three shillings apiece by the hundred.

"Have a smoke.  They're not half bad," said the manager, extending
the box.

The Englishman lit a weed, and felt that it was time to begin
business.

"Why did you recall me from Greece?" he asked.  "They are sure to
stand up to Turkey, unless all signs fail."

This straightforward question seemed to catch the manager unawares.
He rolled his cigar about between his white fingers, and crossed and
uncrossed his legs several times before he answered.

"It's this way," he began, and paused to glance at the closed door.
From the door his eyes turned to Hemming.  "We believe as you do," he
said, "but another man wanted the job.  He left here three days ago."

As Hemming had nothing to say to that, Dodder continued: "The other
chap has been with us five or six years, and, though he is a good
writer, he knows nothing of war.  You were my choice, but Devlin
happens to be Wells's brother-in-law.  I was up against it all right,
so I slid off as easy as I could."

"Thank you all the same," said Hemming.  "Now tell me what you want
done in South America."

"We want you to start in Yucatan," replied Dodder, "or somewhere
along there, and travel, with a nigger or two, to any part of the
country that promises copy.  If you hear of a revolution anywhere, go
hunt it out.  Use the wire when you have news, but for the rest of it
write good, full stories in your usual style.  Why, captain, have you
any idea how many newspapers, in this country and Canada, printed
each of those stories of yours from Greece and Turkey?"

Hemming shook his head.

"Twenty-six, no less," said the manager.  "I believe you would prove
a paying investment if we marooned you on Anticosti," he added.

"I am glad you like my stuff," answered Hemming, "and as for
Anticosti, why, I believe one could make some interesting copy there."

"You must try it one of these days," said Dodder.

At that moment, a thin, undersized man entered the room, without the
formality of knocking.  He walked with a slight limp in his left
foot.  Dodder introduced him to Hemming as Mr. Wells, the syndicate's
treasurer, and a partner in the concern.  Wells gave the
correspondent a nerveless handshake.

"Glad to meet you," he said, and turned to the manager with an air of
inquiry.

It was clear to the Englishman that Dodder was not thoroughly at ease
in his partner's company.  He returned to his cigar and his seat with
a suggestion of "by your leave" in his air.

"I think we shall let Captain Hemming start south as soon as he
likes," he said.

"It's a pleasure trip, is it?" remarked Wells, with his hands in his
pockets, and a casual eye on the Englishman.

Hemming stared, his cigar half-raised to his lips.  Dodder flushed.

"Then Captain Hemming shall start day after to-morrow," he said, in a
soothing voice.  Wells paid no attention to this remark.

"I want you to send in more copy.  You might let us have extra
stories from each place, under another name.  We could use them," he
said to Hemming.  The monocle held him in its unwinking regard for
several seconds.  Then the Englishman spoke:

"I wish you to understand me from the start," he said.  "When I was
in the service of my country, I was perfectly willing to do one man's
work, or three men's work, for the pay that I got, because it was a
matter of sentiment with me, and because I could afford to do it.
But now, if I do two men's work, as you suggest, I draw double pay.
Another thing, I shall take my orders from one man, or I shall take
no orders at all.  Mr. Dodder is my man for choice."

It was evident that this speech of the new correspondent's threw
Dodder into a flurry, and left Wells aghast.  Hemming sat in his
comfortable chair, and calmly smoked his excellent cigar.  At last
Wells found his voice.

"I think the less I have to do with this man, the better," he said,
and left the room.  When the door shut behind him, Dodder sighed with
relief.

"Thank God that's over," he said, and immediately expanded to his
former genial self.

"What is the matter with him?" asked Hemming, mildly.

"Guess he was born that way," replied the manager, "and he really
doesn't know what an impression he gives.  He has a great head for
business."

"I should judge so," said Hemming.

Dodder laughed.  "Now pull up your chair and we'll make your plans,"
he said, straightening his bulky legs under the table.  They worked
busily with maps and note-books for over an hour.  At the end of that
time a clerk entered with a bunch of letters and manuscripts.  One of
the letters was for Hemming.  It had been readdressed and forwarded
half a dozen times; and after all it proved to be nothing more
important than a meandering scrawl from Major O'Grady.  "We keep your
memory green, dear boy," wrote the major, and much more in the same
vein.  But a crooked postscript proved of interest.  It said that
Penthouse was back in Dublin, and was going to the bow-wows at a
fearful pace.

Hemming completed his arrangements with the syndicate, and, returning
to his hotel, lunched solidly on underdone steak, French fried
potatoes, a bottle of ale, a jam tart, and coffee.  Love might
display clay feet.  Wells might be as rude as the devil, and
Penthouse might go to the devil, but Herbert Hemming did not intend
setting forth on his affairs with an empty stomach.  The world was a
rotten enough place without that.  He consumed three cigarettes over
his coffee, in a leisurely manner, and by the time he had left his
table by the window the great dining-room was empty.  He spent the
rest of the day wandering about the city, conquering a desire to
write to Miss Travers.  He dined at an Italian restaurant, and went
early to bed.  By nine next morning, he and his traps were aboard a
little south-bound steamer.




CHAPTER IV.

THE ADVENT OF MR. O'ROURKE AND HIS SERVANT

The company of the _Laura_ was small and undistinguished.  The
captain was a Nova Scotian, big and red, who had, once upon a time,
skippered a full-rigged ship, and who still sighed at the memory of
it as he looked along the narrow, dirty decks of his present craft.
The mate was a New Yorker, with a master's certificate and a head
full of stories of the prowess of the American Navy.  The chief
engineer had once been a good man in his profession, but the whiskey
of his mother country had surely and slowly brought him down to his
present berth.  The half-dozen passengers were of little interest to
Hemming, and the days dragged for him, sickening with memories.  In
self-defence he reverted to fiction, and even attempted verse.

One morning, in the Gulf of Mexico, the _Laura_ was signalled by an
open boat with a rubber blanket for sail.  The engines slowed.
Hemming was on the bridge at the time, and turned the captain's glass
upon the little craft.

"What do you make of it, sir?" inquired the skipper, from the door of
the tiny chart-room below.

"She looks like a ship's boat," replied Hemming.  "The sail is rigged
square, with a boat-hook and an oar for yards, and has a hole in the
middle; it's a poncho, I think.  There's a nigger forward, waving a
shirt, and a white man aft, smoking."

The captain hurried up to the bridge and took the glass.  After
aiming it at the bobbing stranger, he turned to Hemming.

"My boat," he said, "and the same damn fool aboard her."

"Your boat?" inquired Hemming.

The mariner glared, with angry eyes, across the glinting water.
Suddenly his face cleared.  "I win," he cried.  "I bet him ten
dollars he'd have to get out inside six weeks, and by cracky, so he
has!"

"Who is he?" asked the Englishman.

"He's Mr. O'Rourke, the man who's lookin' for trouble," replied the
big Nova Scotian.

"What's he doing with your boat, and why didn't he take a decent sail
while he was about it?" Hemming asked.

"He had a decent enough sail when I saw him last," explained the
skipper, "and I don't mean to say that he's a thief.  He paid for the
boat, right enough, though he bargained pretty close.  He wanted to
see more of Cuba, you know, but the Spaniards wouldn't have anything
more to do with him, because of something he wrote, so he just got me
to steam in five weeks ago, and let him off in the port life-boat.
Now he's back again, with a nigger."

"What's his game?" asked Hemming.

"Search me,--unless it's just trouble," said the mariner, returning
the glass and hurrying down to the deck.

By this time the _Laura_ was rolling lazily.  The captain ordered a
man to stand ready with a line; the poncho was lowered, aboard the
adventurous rowboat, and the nigger manned the oars; the white man in
the stern sheets stood up and raised his Panama hat, and the
passengers along the _Laura's_ rail replied with cheers.  The captain
leaned far over the side.  "What about that bet?" he shouted.  The
stranger drew his hand from a pocket of his ragged ducks and held
something aloft,--something crumpled and green.  Then he regained his
soaring seat, and gripped the tiller.

The captain lifted a beaming countenance to Hemming on the bridge.
"That's the first white man who ever got out of Cuba with ten
dollars," he bawled.  Evidently the captain did not consider
Spaniards as white men.

The line was thrown, and went circling and unfolding through the air
until it fell into the boat.  The ladder was unlashed and dropped
over the _Laura's_ side.  In a minute O'Rourke and the pacifico were
on the deck, and in another minute the port life-boat was back on its
davits.  O'Rourke was warmly welcomed aboard.  Even the chief
engineer appeared from below to shake his hand.  The captain hurried
him to the chart-room, and beckoned to Hemming from the door.  When
Hemming entered, he found the newcomer lying full length on the
locker, with a glass of whiskey and water in his left hand, and the
other under his head.  He got stiffly to his feet upon the
Englishman's entrance, and, after shaking hands cordially, lay down
again.

"Now what do you think of that?" queried the skipper, glancing from
O'Rourke to the other.

O'Rourke laughed good-naturedly, but with a note of weariness.  "I
must confess it was not exactly a Sunday-school picnic," he said,
"and a chap's insides get fearfully squirmy on a diet of sugar-cane
and a few random plantains."

The skipper, who had been carefully, even lovingly, mixing drinks in
two more glasses, eyed O'Rourke severely.

"You'd better get married, and give up them tomfool actions," he
said, "or some fine day the Spaniards will catch up to you, and
then,--well, you'll be sorry, that's all."

"They caught up to several of our party this time," remarked
O'Rourke, casually.

"By Jove!" exclaimed Hemming, straightening his eye-glass.

The man with the Irish name and non-committal accent turned his head
on the locker, and smiled at the other adventurer.

"They were not particular pals of mine," he said, reassuringly, "so I
didn't stay to inquire their fate."

"You're fool enough to have stayed," remarked the skipper.

Hemming stared at the free and easy language of the mariner, and at
O'Rourke's good-natured way of taking it, for he had not yet become
entirely accustomed to the ways of the world outside the army, and
this O'Rourke, though unshaven and in tatters, was certainly a
gentleman, by Hemming's standards.  The master of the _Laura_ may
have read something of this in his passenger's face, for he turned to
him and said: "Mr. O'Rourke and I are pretty good friends.  We've
played ashore together, and we've sailed together more than once, and
when I call him a fool, why, it's my way of saying he's the
bangest-up, straight-grained man I know.  I never call him a fool
before his inferiors, and if it came to any one else calling him
anything, why--" and he slapped his big red hand on the chart-room
table with a blow that rocked the bottles.

"Shut up," said O'Rourke, blushing beneath his bristles and tan, "or
Captain Hemming will take me for as silly an ass as he takes you."

"Not at all," began Hemming, awkwardly, and, when the others roared
with laughter, he hid his confusion by draining his glass.  He had
never before been laughed at quite so violently, but he found, rather
to his surprise, that he liked it.

After lunch, O'Rourke (whose full name was Bertram St. Ives O'Rourke)
retired to his stateroom, and did not reappear until dinner-time.  He
looked better then, clean shaven, and attired in one of the skipper's
extra warm-weather suits.  He filled the borrowed clothes well enough
in length and in breadth of shoulder, but confessed, at table, that
the trousers lapped twice around his waist.  During the simple meal,
the conversation was all of the internal disturbance of Cuba, and all
the passengers, as well as the skipper, seemed interested in the
matter and well informed of recent incidents.  Hemming listened
keenly, now and then putting a question.  O'Rourke told a part of his
adventures during his last stay in the island, and sketched, in vivid
and well-chosen words, the daily life of the patriots.  It was not as
romantic as Hemming had hoped.

"It's a low sort of fighting on both sides,--not the kind you have
mixed in," said O'Rourke to Hemming.

"I?" exclaimed Hemming, while the dusky passengers and burly skipper
pricked up their ears.

"I saw your initials--H.H.--on your cigarette case," he explained,
"and I have read some good things signed H.H., by an Englishman, on
English army life, so of course I spotted you."

"I'm doing work for the New York News Syndicate now," said Hemming.

After dinner, O'Rourke led the way to the chart-room.  From the
locker he produced a small typewriting machine.  This he oiled, and
set up on the table.  The skipper winked at Hemming.

"I wish I'd smashed the danged thing while he was away," he said.
O'Rourke paid not the slightest attention to this pleasantry, but
inserted a sheet of paper, of which he had a supply stored in the
same place of safety.

"Now," said he, seating himself on a camp-stool before the machine,
"I don't mind how much you two talk, but I have some work to do."

"You, too?" laughed the Englishman.

"I'm only a free-lance," said O'Rourke, and, lighting a cigarette, he
began clicking the keys.  For more than an hour he worked steadily,
while the skipper and Hemming sat side by side on the locker and told
stories.  The door was hooked open, and a fresh breeze kept the room
cool, and circled the pungent smoke.

When Hemming turned in, he found that He could not sleep.  His brain
jumped and kept busy, in spite of him.  Now he lived again his
exciting days in Northern India.  From this he flashed to the Norfolk
tennis lawn, where Molly Travers listened again to his ardent vows.
He turned over and tried to win himself to slumber by counting
imaginary sheep.  But that only seemed to suggest to his memory the
care-free days of his youth.  Again he built forts in the warm earth
of the potting-house.  Again he fled from the red-headed gardener,
and stumbled into piled-up ranks of flowerpots, hurling them to
destruction.  Again he watched his father, in pink and spurs, trot
down the avenue in the gold, rare sunlight of those days.  Feeling
that these good memories would carry him safely to the land of peace,
he closed his eyes,--only to find his mind busy with that last day in
London.  He climbed swiftly from his berth, and, after slipping his
feet into his shoes, ascended to the deck.  He did not wait to change
his pajamas for anything more conventional.  There was not a breath
of wind.  The stars burned big and white; the water over the side
flashed away in silver fire, and farther out some rolling fish broke
its trail of flame; to starboard lay a black suggestion of land.
Looking forward, he saw that the door of the chart-room stood open,
emitting a warm flood of lamplight.  He went up to the lower bridge,
or half-deck, where the chart-room stood, and glanced within.  The
skipper lay on the locker, snoring peacefully, and O'Rourke still
clicked at the typewriter.  Hemming stole quietly in and poured
himself a glass of water from the clay bottle on the rack.

"Don't let me disturb you," he said to the worker.  "I'll just have a
smoke to kill wakefulness."

"If you can't sleep," said O'Rourke, "just listen to this as long as
your eyes will stay open."

He sorted over his pages of copy and began to read.  His voice was
low-pitched, and through it sounded the whispering of the steamer's
passage across the rocking waters.  The style was full of colour, and
Hemming was keenly interested from start to finish.  Not until the
last page was turned over did O'Rourke look up.

"What! not asleep yet!" he exclaimed.

"That seems to me very fine," said Hemming, seriously, "and I should
certainly take it for literature of an unusually high order if I did
not know that journalists cannot write literature."

"Do you think it will do?" asked O'Rourke, modestly.

"My dear chap," replied Hemming, "it will do for anything,--for a
book, or to carve on a monument.  It's a dashed sight too good for
any newspaper."

"It certainly wouldn't do for a newspaper," laughed the younger man.
"Just imagine an editor with a blue pencil, loose on those
descriptions of vegetation.  When I do newspaper stuff, I throw in
the blood and leave out the beauty.  That is for _Griffin's
Magazine_."

"Are you sure of your market?" asked the Englishman, wondering for
even in England, _Griffin's_ was known for its quality.

"It was ordered," said O'Rourke, "and this will make the ninth
article I have done for them within five years.  After months of
seeing and feeling things, I put the heart of it all, at one sitting,
into a story for _Griffin's_.  After that I cook my experiences and
hard-earned knowledge into lesser dishes for lesser customers.
Sometimes I even let it off in lyrics."

"You must flood the magazines," remarked Hemming, dryly.

"Not I.  To begin with, I place a great deal of my work with
publications of which you have never heard, and then, as I am young
and very productive, I write under three names, using my own for only
the things I wish to stand."

He arose and turned out the light, and to Hemming's amazement gray
dawn was on the sea and the narrow decks, and on the morning wind
came the odour of coffee.

"I think we are both good for a nap now," said O'Rourke.  They left
the master of the boat slumbering on his narrow couch, and went to
their staterooms; and before Hemming fell asleep, with his face to
the draft of the port, he thanked God in his heart for a new friend.




CHAPTER V.

THE ADVENTURERS DISPENSE WITH MR. NUNEZ

Hemming and O'Rourke, and O'Rourke's low-caste Cuban, landed in
Belize.  The _Laura_ continued on her way to Truxillo, and more
southern ports, for which she had a mixed freight of cheap articles
of American manufacture.  She would start north again from Costa
Rica, should she be able to find a cargo, so O'Rourke and Hemming had
both given manuscripts and letters to the Nova Scotia skipper, for
mailing at the first likely opportunity, with word that they would
wire an address later.  This done, the adventurers purchased three
undersized mules.  O'Rourke picked up what he could in the way of an
outfit, having left everything but his pipe and poncho in the Cuban
bush.  They loaded one of the mules with their belongings, and put it
in charge of John Nunez, and, mounting the others, started south,
skirting the coast.  The trip was uneventful, but Hemming wrote a
number of stories descriptive of the country and the people, the
mules and his companions, under the general title of "Along New
Trails with Old Mules."  O'Rourke regarded his friend's display of
energy with kindly disdain.

"There is bigger game to seaward," he said, and seemed ever on the
lookout for rumours of war from the northeast.  After three weeks'
easy travelling, they awoke one morning to find that John Nunez had
taken his departure during the night, and, along with his departure,
one of their mules, a bag of hardtack and a slab of bacon.

O'Rourke looked relieved.  "I've often wondered how I could ever get
rid of him, you know.  I once saved his life," he said.

"It's a good thing we happened to be using the rest of the provisions
for pillows, or, by gad, your precious servant would have left us to
starve," replied Hemming, in injured tones.

"Cheer up, old man," laughed O'Rourke.  "We're not three miles from
the coast, and I'll bet we are within ten of a village of some sort,"
he explained.

He was right, for by noon they were sitting at their ease before
black coffee and a Spanish omelette, in a shabby eating-house.  The
town was one of some importance--in its own eyes.  Also it interested
Hemming.  But O'Rourke sniffed.

"Gay colours and bad smells--I've experienced the whole thing
before," said he.

"Then why the devil did you leave the _Laura_?" asked Hemming,
pouring himself another glass of doubtful claret.

"To look after you," retorted O'Rourke.

"But, seriously," urged the Englishman.

"Oh, if you will be serious," confessed the freelance, "I'll admit
that it's in my blood.  I might have gone to New York and waited till
further developments in Cuba; but I could no more see you go ashore,
to waste your time and money, without wanting to follow suit, than
you could see me buy that high-priced claret without wanting to drink
it all yourself."

Hemming turned his monocle upon his friend in mild and curious regard.

"I doubt if there is another chap alive," he said, "who can write
such wisdom and talk such rot as you."

"Oh, go easy," expostulated O'Rourke, "you've only read one article
of mine--the twenty-page result of five weeks' sugar-cane and
observation."

"It was remarkable stuff," mused Hemming.

The younger man had the grace to bow.  "You don't look like the kind
of chap who is lavish with his praise," he said.

Lighting a potent local cigar, he leaned back in his rickety chair,
and shouted something in Spanish.  The owner of the place appeared,
rubbing his hands together and bowing.  He was a fat, brown man,
smelling of native cookery and native tobacco.  O'Rourke talked, at
some length, in Spanish, only a few words of which could Hemming
understand.  The proprietor waved his cigarette and gabbled back.
Again O'Rourke took up the conversation, and this time his flow of
mongrel Spanish was pricked out with bluff English oaths.

Hemming asked what it was all about.  O'Rourke gave himself up to
laughter.

"I have been trying to sell our mules," he said, at last, "but find
that the market is already glutted."

Hemming shook his head disconsolately.  "I fail to see the joke," he
said.

"Mine host here informs me that a Cuban gentleman arrived shortly
after daylight this morning," continued O'Rourke, "and sold a mule to
the American consul."

"Our mule," gasped the enlightened Englishman--then, leaping from his
chair with a violence that caused the fat proprietor to take refuge
behind a table, he cried that there was still a chance of overtaking
the rascal.  O'Rourke begged him to finish his claret in peace.  "And
don't do anything rash," he said, "for I warn you that if you catch
him you'll have to keep him.  I tremble even now, lest he should
enter the door and reclaim me as his master."  He blew a thin wisp of
smoke toward the ceiling, and laughed comfortably.  Then his glance
lowered to his friend, who had reseated himself at the other side of
the table.  He saw amazement and consternation written large in
Hemming's face.  The landlord also looked thunderstruck, standing
with his mouth open, his eyes fixed upon the door, and a dirty napkin
idle in his hand.  O'Rourke turned and followed their enraptured
gaze--and behold, clothed in new trousers and gaudy poncho, John
Nunez bowing on the threshold.

For long seconds a painful silence held the inmates of the
eating-house in thrall.  The delinquent broke it with a stream of
talk.  He pointed heavenward; he touched his breast with his fingers;
he spread his arms wide, and all the while he gabbled in Spanish.
Tears ran down his dusky cheeks.  O'Rourke regained his easy
attitude, and heard the story to the end.  He kept his gaze upon the
Cuban's face, and not once did the Cuban meet it.  At last the fellow
stopped talking, and stood before his master with his sullen,
tear-stained face half-hidden in a fold of his gay blanket.

"Well?" inquired Hemming.

"He says that he meant no harm," replied O'Rourke, "but that the
desire to steal was like fever in his blood.  He swears this by more
saints than I know the name of.  He says that he will give me the
money that he got for the mule, and will toil for me until the day of
his death, without a dollar of wages.  But he has sworn all these
things before, and every fit of repentance seems to make him more of
a rogue.  As for wages--why, his grub costs more than he is worth."

"Just let me take him in hand," said Hemming.

"You may try," assented O'Rourke.

By this time, and knowing his master's easy nature, Nunez was feeling
more at home.  The attitude of the penitent was not natural to him.
He freed one arm from the folds of his poncho and calmly extracted a
cigarette from his sash.  This he was about to light when Hemming's
voice arrested him in the act.

"Throw away that cigarette," came the order.

The Cuban feigned ignorance of the English language.  He raised his
eyebrows, paused a second to smile insolently, and lit the frail roll
of black tobacco with a flourish.  He inhaled the first puff with
very evident pleasure, and let it escape by way of his nostrils.  But
he did not draw the second, for Hemming's hand landed unexpectedly
upon the side of his head.  The cigarette flew at a tangent,
unrolling as it hit the earthen floor.  The Cuban span completely
around, reeled for a second, and then sprang at the Englishman with
drawn knife.  O'Rourke and the half-breed Mexican cried a warning.
They might have saved their breath for their next long walk, for
Hemming, quick as a terrier in his movements, stepped to one side and
delivered a remarkable blow with his fist.  The Cuban--a flash of gay
clothing and harmless knife-blade--went, backward, through the narrow
doorway.

"And now," said Hemming to O'Rourke, "what are we to do next?"

"Do next?" repeated O'Rourke, sadly, "why, just sit and whistle for
the fifty Mexican dollars, which the American consul paid John for
our mule."

Hemming hurried to the door and looked up and down the glaring
street.  Nunez was nowhere to be seen.

"He's not lying around anywhere, shamming dead, is he?" inquired
O'Rourke.

"Don't see him," replied Hemming.

"Then now is our chance to shake him for good," said the other, "and
the only way I can think of is to put out to sea."

As if he had made the most reasonable suggestion in the world, he
paid their score and stepped into the street.  Hemming followed to
the water-front, too deep in wonder to offer objections, or demand
explanations.




CHAPTER VI.

HEMMING HEARS OF THE VILLAIN

Six days later, in a club in Kingston, Jamaica, Hemming ran across a
naval officer whom he had met, years ago, at a county ball.

"Hullo, left the army?" asked the sailor.

"Verily," replied Hemming, who could not recall the other's name.

"What--more money?"

"Less."

"Nice scandal in your old regiment.  You're well out of it."

"I have heard nothing.  We rather prided ourselves on our
respectability."

"A chap called Penthouse," ran on the sailor, "has turned out a
regular sneak-thief.  The others began to miss things--money and
cuff-links, and trifles like that--and one day the colonel caught him
in his room pocketing a gold watch.  I believe the poor beggar was
hard up--at least so my correspondent says."

At this point he noticed the pallor of Hemming's face.

"Not a friend of yours, I hope," he added, hastily.

"Far from it, but he is related to some people I know very well,"
replied Hemming.

"He was a low cur, even before he turned thief," said the talkative
sailor, "and Jones tells me he fleeced an awfully decent, but stupid
sort of chap--"  He came to a full stop, and glared blankly at his
new-found acquaintance.

"Thank you," laughed Hemming, who had regained his composure as the
navy man lost his.

"Ah--damn silly break, wasn't it?" gabbled the other, turning to
O'Rourke, "but you two'll come aboard to-morrow, and have lunch with
us.  One-thirty, and there's a turtle in the pot."  He left the club
without waiting for an answer.

Hemming and O'Rourke had made the voyage from Honduras to Kingston in
a fifty-foot schooner.  For passage-money they had handed over the
two mules, together with the residue of their provisions.  Things are
not as cheap as they look in Central America.  O'Rourke had navigated
the vessel, for the owner had proved himself useless, and Hemming had
hauled on sheets and halyards and worked the antiquated pump.  But in
time they had arrived safely in Kingston, and never had hot water and
clean food felt and tasted so good.  Hemming had mailed his "copy,"
O'Rourke had gone to a tailor; and now they lived at ease, and
awaited checks and letters from the North.  The friendship of these
two had been an assured thing from the moment of their first meeting,
in the chart-room of the _Laura_, and it had grown steadily with
every adventure and hardship in common.  They respected each other's
dauntless spirits and literary styles.  Hemming admired O'Rourke's
cheerful heart, and his faculty (almost amounting to genius) for
getting out of tight places.  He also liked his manners, and envied
him the length of his limbs.  O'Rourke, in his turn, admired his
comrade's knowledge of things in general, and the way in which he
kept quiet about incidents in his past, without sulkiness.  He liked
his hasty, forgiving temper, and felt an almost personal anger toward
whatever, or whoever, had embittered his life; and he considered him
as well set-up a middleweight as he had ever seen.  From O'Rourke,
Hemming learned to do things for himself--little things like rolling
a blanket, frying bacon, and pitching a tent.  In the past there had
always been a Mr. Thomas Atkins to look after such trifles.  Also he
learned that no knowledge comes amiss to a roving newspaper man, from
the science of navigation to the art of sewing on patches, and the
low occupation of grooming a mule.  He realized how much more
comfortable his life in the army, and his travelling in Greece and
Turkey would have been, had he been able to turn his own hand to the
things other people had left undone.  His heart warmed toward his
instructor.  One night, while they were smoking on the veranda of
their hotel, and looking away at the lights in the harbour, he told a
little of his story--something of Penthouse, and something of the
girl he loved.  But he did not mention her name, and, much to his
relief, O'Rourke did not seem curious about it.  That was one of
O'Rourke's most comfortable characteristics.  It was really a matter
of breeding.  He was deeply interested in whatever a person chose to
tell him, and he would put helpful questions which did not call for
further confessions; but he never tried to draw a man.  One might
safely tell him that one's grandmother had been a cannibal, without
fear of being asked any question concerning one's grandfather.  If he
really wanted to know, he would go quietly to some one else for the
information.

Shortly after arriving in Jamaica, Hemming wrote a letter to
Anderson, his particular friend in the Engineers.  He mentioned
having heard of Penthouse's outbreak, but said nothing of the
occurrences of his last visit to London.  He told, at a length
suggestive of his profession, of the trip through Yucatan and
Honduras, of his new friend, and of the adventurous passage from the
coast of Central America to Kingston.  He sang the praises of a free
life and the glories of the tropics.  He spoke of his success with
the syndicate, and the probability of fighting in Cuba in the near
future.  He tried hard to make every line of the letter echo
contentment, knowing that Anderson would, very likely, retail its
contents to Miss Travers.

"My God," he said, "I was fool enough, once, to let her see the wound
she made, but once is for all."

For the remainder of the morning O'Rourke found him in a low mood,
and after trying, in vain, to raise his spirits with a new cigar as
long as a riding-boot, he smoked the weed himself and wrote a ballad
about pirates and blood.  It was the ballad, complete after an hour's
work, that did the business for Hemming.  The swinging lines and
rolling phrases, the fearful sea-oaths and unexpected rhymes started
him in action.  At first he was not sure whether he wanted to ride or
write, but, with a little tactful persuasion from O'Rourke, decided
on the former.  They hired a couple of horses, went to the club, and
drew several of their friends of H.M.S. _Thunderer_, and rode for
hours, lunching late, out of town.

One morning Hemming received a cablegram from Dodder, of the New York
Syndicate, telling him to stand ready for orders, and that a letter
followed.  In a few days the letter came.  It was a friendly, though
businesslike epistle, and contained a check.  It ran as follows:


"MY DEAR CAPTAIN HEMMING:--Your stories reached me, and were
immediately set up and distributed broadcast.  They please me, as
does all your work.  I got a check from Wells for the amount of two
months' expenses (at the rate we agreed upon), and your salary, up to
date, has been marked to your credit.  I believe there will be
trouble in Europe before long, and we hear that Devlin, of whom I
spoke to you, is down with some sort of fever.  Be prepared to start
East at the shortest notice, and please look up some one, an
experienced man, of course, to keep an eye on Cuba for us, should you
have to leave.  A man who knows the country, and is immune from
yellow fever, would be of more value than an experienced journalist.
We have journalists here, but I fear they would fall down on the job.
I do not believe the Cuban affair will ever come to more than
skirmishing, but even that is interesting when it happens at our own
back door.  No mail has come to us for you.  Please write us if you
know of a man.

  "Yours very sincerely,
      "WASHINGTON DODDER, Manager."


Hemming read it to O'Rourke.

"Will you accept the job?" he asked.

"Yes, when some one lands an invading army, but not before," replied
O'Rourke.  "Fact is, I'm afraid to sneak into the place again.  The
Spaniards know me too well.  I've run away with Gomez and I've
retreated with Garcia, and I've had quite enough of it.  But if you
have to leave and I can't get a chance to go along with you, I'll
keep my eye on things, and do what a man can.  I can at least send
them some photographs of starving women and babies with distended
tummies.  I notice, by the magazines, that the popular fancy is
turning toward sweet pictures of that kind, and, as luck would have
it, I indulged in photography last time I was there, and the films
happened to be in my pocket when John and I sailed away."

Thus did Bertram St. Ives O'Rourke, the free-lance who hated to move
or stay at any man's bidding, fetter himself with the chain of duty,
and become the servant of a great syndicate.  But for weeks he did
not feel the chain, but made merry with sailors and landsmen, and did
inspired work for _Griffin's Magazine_.  At last word came to
Hemming, calling him to the East to report the actions of the wily
Turk and courageous Greek, and, after putting his friend aboard the
mail-boat, O'Rourke sat down and grappled the fact of his own
responsibilities.  After due consideration he wrote to the syndicate,
explained his position, mentioned his past efforts in Cuba, and
promised some interesting cables if they would send him enough money
to charter a tug.  To his amazement (his name carried more weight
than he knew) they wired the money and told him to go ahead.

Thus it happened that within eight days of one another's departure,
and after an intimate and affectionate friendship, Herbert Hemming
sailed for one battle-field and Bertram St. Ives O'Rourke for
another, and one stout gentleman in New York paid all the pipers.




CHAPTER VII.

AN ELDERLY CHAMPION

While Herbert Hemming tried to ease the bitterness of his heart and
forget the injustice that had been done him, in new scenes and amid
new companions, Miss Travers suffered at home.  Her lover had
scarcely left the house before misgivings tore her.  Now, alone and
shaken with grief, she saw upon what treasonable foundation she had
accused an honourable man of--she hardly knew what.  Why had he
listened to her?  Why had he not laughed, and kissed away her awful,
hysterical foolishness?  Then she remembered how she had repulsed his
caress, and there in the narrow, heavily furnished drawing-room she
leaned her head upon her arms and prayed.

Half an hour later she was startled by the ringing of the door-bell,
and hastened to her own room.

The caller was an elderly bachelor brother of her mother's--a man
with a small income, a taste for bridge, and tongue and ears for
gossip.  His visits were always welcome to Mrs. Travers.  Mrs.
Travers was a stout lady much given to family prayers, scandal, and
disputes with servants.  As the widow of a bishop she felt that she
filled, in the being of the nation, a somewhat similar position to
that occupied by Westminster Abbey.  She doted on all those in
temporal and spiritual authority, almost to the inclusion of curates
and subalterns,--if they had expectations.  Once upon a time, seeing
nothing larger in sight for her daughter, she had been Herbert
Hemming's motherly friend.  Then she had heard from Mr. Penthouse
(who was poor and dissipated, and might some day become a baronet)
that Hemming's fortune was not nearly so large as people supposed.
At first she had watched the change in her daughter, under
Penthouse's influence, with vague alarm; but a suspicion of more
eligible suitors in the offing stilled her fears.  The hints which
her pleasing nephew brought to her, of Hemming's double life,
inflamed her righteous anger against the quiet captain.  Had her
daughter's lover been the master of five thousand a year she would
have admonished Penthouse to keep silence concerning the affairs of
his superiors.  As it was, she thought her righteous indignation
quite genuine, for few people of her kind know the full extent of
their respectable wickedness.  Then had come news, through her
daughter, of Hemming's retirement from the army and entrance into
journalism.  Molly had mentioned it, very quietly, one morning at
breakfast.  Then had come Hemming himself, and with vast satisfaction
she had heard him leave the house without any bright laughter at the
door.  And just as she had determined to descend and soothe Molly
with words of pious comfort, her brother had arrived.

Mrs. Travers heard Molly go to her room and close the door.  She
decided that charity would keep better than Mr. Pollin's gossip, so
she descended to the drawing-room as fast as her weight would allow.
They shook hands cordially; after which Mr. Pollin stood respectfully
until his sister got safely deposited in the strongest chair in the
room.

Mr. Pollin was a gossip, as I have previously stated, but many of his
stories were harmless.  He dressed in the height of fashion, and, in
spite of his full figure, carried himself jauntily.  In his youth
(before he had come in for his modest property, and mastered whist)
he had studied law, and it was rumoured that he had even tried to
write scholarly articles and book reviews for the daily press.  At
one stage in his career his sister and the late bishop had really
trembled for his respectability; but their fears had proved to be
unfounded, for, lacking encouragement from the editors, Mr. Pollin
had settled down to unbroken conventionality.  Mr. Pollin's features
resembled his sister's, but his mouth was more given to smiling, and
his eyes held a twinkle, while hers were dimly lit with a gleam of
cold calculation.

To-day Mr. Pollin had quite unexpected news, at first-hand from an
Irish acquaintance of his, a Major O'Grady.  But he did not blurt it
out, as a lesser gossip would have done.

"Have you seen Harry Penthouse lately?" he asked.

"Not for two days," said the lady.

Mr. Pollin crossed his knees with an effort, and tried to look over
his waistcoat at his polished boots.

"He returns to his regiment shortly," added Mrs. Travers.

Her brother coughed gently, and scrutinized the ring on his finger
with an intensity that seemed quite uncalled for.

"What is the matter?" cried the lady, breathless with the suspense.

"Nothing, my dear, although I hardly envy Harry.  I'm afraid he will
find his regiment a rather uncomfortable place," replied Pollin.

"Do you mean the regiment, or his quarters, Richard?"

"His quarters are comfortable enough for a better man," replied the
elderly dandy, with a slight ring of emotion in his voice.

"Richard," exclaimed the dame, "what are you hinting about your
nephew?"

"No nephew of mine," replied the other, "nor even of yours, I think.
Poor Charles and old Sir Peter were first cousins, were they not?"

"But they were just like brothers," she urged.

"It's a pity young Penthouse hadn't been spanked more in his early
youth," remarked Mr. Pollin.

Mrs. Travers began to feel decidedly uneasy.  Could it be that Harry
had, in some way, forfeited his chances of the estate and title?
Could it be that the invalid brother, the unsociable, close-fisted
one, had married?  But she did not put the questions.

"What rash thing has the young man done?" she inquired.

"Nothing rash, but something dashed low," answered her brother.
"To-day," he continued, "I received a letter from a gentleman whom it
appears I've met several times in the country, Major O'Grady, of the
Seventy-Third.  He has evidently quite forgotten the fact that I am
in any way connected with Harry Penthouse, or interested in Herbert
Hemming, and after several pages of reference to some exciting
rubbers we have had together (I really cannot recall them to mind),
he casually tells me the inner history of Hemming's leaving the
service."

"Ah, I thought so," sighed Mrs. Travers.

"Thought what, my dear sister?" asked Pollin, shortly.

The good lady was somewhat confused by the abruptness of her
brother's manner, and her guard was forgotten.

"That the inner history," she replied, "is that Captain Hemming was
requested to resign his commission."

"You have jumped the wrong way, Cordelia," said the gentleman, with a
disconcerting smile, "for the regiment, from the colonel to the
newest subaltern, and from the sergeant-major to the youngest bugler,
are, figuratively speaking, weeping over his departure."

Mrs. Travers seemed to dwindle in her chair.  "Then why did he
retire?" she asked, in a thin whisper.

"Because Harry Penthouse wolfed all his money.  At first he borrowed
a hundred or so, and lost it gambling.  Hemming got a bit shy, but
thought, of course, that some day it would all be paid back.  He
wanted to help the boy, so, after a good deal of persuasion, endorsed
his note for a large sum, and the note was cashed by a Jew who had
helped Penthouse before.  The Jew was honest, but he came a cropper
himself, and could not afford to renew the note.  Penthouse had only
enough left to carry him stylishly over his two months' leave, so
Hemming had to stump up.  O'Grady says he didn't get so much as a
'Thank you' from the young bounder."

For several minutes the lady kept a stunned silence.  Presently she
braced herself, and laughed unmusically.

"I have heard a very different story," she said, "and I believe from
a better authority than this Major O'Brady."

"O'Grady," corrected Pollin, "and a very dear friend of mine--cousin
to Sir Brian O'Grady."

The good fellow's imagination was getting the bit in its teeth by
this time, and his mind was turning toward the quiet of his club, and
a nip of something before dinner.

"You have your choice between Major O'Grady's story and Harry
Penthouse's," said the lady.

"And I choose O'Grady's," replied the gentleman, "because I know
Penthouse and I know Herbert.  Herbert is a good soldier and a good
sort, and Harry is a damned overgrown, overfed cad."

He stole away without farewell, abashed and surprised at his own heat
and breach of etiquette.

After her brother's departure Mrs. Travers sought her daughter.  She
wanted to know all the particulars of Hemming's visit.

"It is all over between us," sobbed the girl, and beyond that she
could learn nothing.  Having failed to receive information, she
immediately began to impart some, and told what Mr. Pollin had heard
from Major O'Grady.  Molly, who lay on the bed, kept her face buried
in the pillow, and showed no signs of hearing anything.  At last her
mother left her, after saying that she would send her dinner up to
her.  The bewildered woman had never felt quite so put about since
the death of the lord bishop.  Could it be, she wondered, that she
had made a mistake in encouraging Harry Penthouse's work tearing down
Molly's belief in Hemming?  Even her dinner did not altogether
reassure her troubled spirit.

Several days later Miss Travers wrote to Hemming.  It contained only
a line or two.  It begged his forgiveness.  It called him to return
and let her show her love.  She sent it to his old address in Dublin,
and in the corner wrote "Please forward."

[Illustration: "SEVERAL DAYS LATER MISS TRAVERS WROTE TO HEMMING"]

Now it happened that Private Malloy, who had once been Captain
Hemming's orderly, was sent one day, by a sergeant, for the officers'
mail.  He thought himself a sly man, did Mr. Malloy, and when he
found a letter addressed to his late beloved master, in a familiar
handwriting, he decided that it was from "one of them dunnin' Jews,"
and carefully separated it from the pile.  Later he burned it.  "One
good turn deserves another," said he, watching the thin paper flame
and fade.

Penthouse returned to his regiment without calling again on Molly and
Mrs. Travers.  Somehow, after the beating he had received, he did not
feel like showing his face anywhere in town.  Day after day Molly
waited for an answer to her letter.  By this time she had heard, from
Captain Anderson (who had acted nervously during his short call), of
Hemming's intention of going immediately to Greece.  So for two weeks
she waited hopefully.  Then the horrible fear that she had hurt him
beyond pardoning, perhaps even disgusted him, grew upon her.  But for
more than a month every brisk footfall on the pavement and every ring
at the door-bell set her heart burning and left it throbbing with
pain.

When she drove with her mother she scanned the faces of the men in
the street, and often and often she changed colour at sight of a
thin, alert face or broad, gallant shoulders in the crowd.

Captain Anderson was at Aldershot when he received his friend's
letter from Jamaica.  He went up to town and called on Miss Travers,
and, without so much as "by your leave," read her extracts from the
letter.  She listened quietly, with downcast eyes and white face.
When he was through with it she looked at him kindly; but her eyes
were dim.

"Why do you taunt me?" she asked.  "Is it because you are his
friend?"  The smile that followed the question was not a happy one.

The sapper's honest face flamed crimson.  "I thought you wanted to
know about him," he stammered.

"Of course I am glad to hear that he is so successful--and so happy,"
she replied, and her mouth took on a hardness strange and new to it.
She remembered the passionate appeal in her own letter--the cry of
love that had awakened no answering cry--and her pride and anger set
to work to tear the dreams from her heart.  But a dream built by the
Master Workman, of stuffs lighter than the wind, outlasts the heavy
walls of kings' monuments.




CHAPTER VIII.

HEMMING UNDERTAKES A DIGNIFIED WORK

Hemming went through the Turko-Grecian campaign from beginning to
end, with much credit to himself and profit to the syndicate.  He
worked hard, and, on occasions, risked life and limb.  No word of
legitimate news of actions got out of the country ahead of his.  When
the fighting was over, he wrote a careful article on the uselessness
of the sword in modern battles.  He described the few occasions in
which he had seen a blooded sword in action.  He damned them all--the
pointed blade of the infantry officer, and the cutting sabre of the
cavalry trooper.  They would do for hill raids, or charges against
savages, but before the steady fire of men on foot, armed with rifles
of the latest pattern, they were hopeless.  Their day had passed with
the passing of the ramrod, he said.  After heading it "Cold Steel in
Modern Warfare," he decided that it would be a pity to waste it on
the New York News Syndicate; for of late he had become dissatisfied
with his arrangements with the syndicate.  He had found that, out of
the dozen or more war-correspondents whom he had met during the
campaign, only two were allowed so small a sum as he for expenses,
and not one was paid so small a salary.  So he mailed his wise story
to a big London weekly, and wrote to Dodder for a raise in his salary
and expenses.  At this time he was living quietly in Athens, with a
number of friends,--merry fellows, all,--but he missed O'Rourke's
whimsical conversations and kindly comradeship.

The big London weekly published Hemming's article, and commented upon
it editorially.  It also sent him a modest check--more modest than
its size and reputation would lead one to suppose.  Mr. Dodder's
letter arrived at about the same time.  The manager of the syndicate
was firm, though gentle.  He pointed out that already Hemming drew
more money than any other correspondent connected with the concern.
He explained that, even now, Mr. Wells frequently grumbled.  "And
after all," he concluded, "you are a new man, and we are helping you
to a reputation."

"We'll see about that," said Hemming, and wrote to say that he would
like to take a holiday until more fighting turned up.  He sent them
his address for the next six months--Maidmill-on-Dee, Cheshire,
England.  Then he sold his horse, packed his things, and sailed for
England.

At Maidmill-on-Dee, in a stone cottage with a slated roof, lived an
old couple named Thomson.  During the brief married life of Hemming's
parents, these two good folk had looked after their bodily
welfare--Thomson as gardener and groom, and Mrs. Thomson as cook.
Hemming's father, though well connected, had made his livelihood as a
country doctor.  The people in Maidmill-on-Dee still remembered him
as a handsome, generous man with the manner of a lord lieutenant of
the county, and with always a good horse in his stables.  Hemming's
mother had been the daughter of a scholarly, though poor, country
vicar.  She had been a beauty in a frail, white way, and a lover of
her husband, her home, and good literature.  When the doctor had died
of blood-poisoning, contracted during a simple operation upon one of
his many poor patients, she had tried, for awhile, to take heart
again, but had followed him within a year.  After the deaths of the
parents a wealthy relative had remembered the son, and, finding him a
youth of promise, had given him some money.

Hemming drove from the station in the public bus.  He passed the
house where so much of his earlier years had been spent, and told the
driver to take him to Joseph Thomson's.  They rattled down the quiet,
single street, and drew up at the stone threshold.  He helped the
driver pile his bags and boxes beside the door.  Then he dismissed
the conveyance, and paused for awhile before entering the cottage,
with a warm, new feeling of homecoming in his heart.  The low, wide
kitchen was unoccupied, but the door leading to the garden behind
stood open.  He sat down in a well-worn chair and looked about.  The
October sunlight lit up the dishes on the dresser.  A small table by
a window was laid with plates and cups for two.  He heard voices in
the garden.  A woman, stout and gray-haired, entered with a head of
Brussels sprouts in her hand, and with her cotton skirt kilted up,
displaying a bright, quilted petticoat.  Hemming got up from his
chair, but she was not looking toward him, and she was evidently hard
of hearing.  He stepped in front of her and laid his hands on her
shoulders.

"Susan," he said, beaming.

"Lor', Master Bert," she exclaimed, "you're still at your tricks."

In a flutter of delight she smacked him squarely on the mouth, and
then, blushing and trembling, begged his pardon.

"I can't think you're a grown-up man," she explained.  She surveyed
him at arm's length.

"You're not overly big," she said, "an' that's a fact.  But you're
surprising thick through the chest and wide i' the shoulders.  An'
who'd ever have looked for Master Bert, all so suddent, i'
Maidmill-on-Dee."

By this time she was in a fair way to burst into tears, so fast were
the old memories crowding upon her.  Hemming feared tears more than
the devil, and, patting her violently on the back, forced her into a
chair.

"There, Susan, there.  Now keep cool and fire low, and tell me what
you are going to have for lunch?" he urged.

"Thomson," she called, "there is a gentleman here as wants to see
you."

"Bes there, now?" said Thomson, and rubbed his hands on his smock.

"Never mind your hands," she called.

Thomson scraped his heavy way into the kitchen, and blinked at the
visitor.

"Howde, sir," he remarked, affably.

"How are you, Thomson?  Glad to see you again," said Hemming,
extending his hand.

The old gardener gave back a step, with a slight cry and an uptossing
of gnarled hands.

He recovered himself with an effort.

"God bless me, it's Master Herbert," he exclaimed.  "Do you know,
missus, I thought it was the doctor askin' how I was," he continued,
turning to his wife, "but the master was a more sizable man,--yes,
an' redder i' the face."

"Ay," replied Mrs. Thomson, "but hansome is as hansome does--meanin'
nothin' disrespectful about the old master, God bless his memory,
dear man,--and Master Bert is a fine appearin' young gentleman."

The gaffer nodded.  "The lasses wud believe you, missus," he said.

"What lasses do you mean?" inquired the old woman, sharply.  "Where's
the lass i' this village fit to believe anything about one o' the
queen's officers--tell me that."

"Ay, I was sayin' nothin'," replied Thomson.

The woman looked quizzically at Hemming.

"Like enough there's a young lady in Lunnon," she suggested.

"There is no young lady--anywhere," said Hemming, "and I'm no longer
in the army.  I'm at another trade now."

"Trade?" exclaimed Thomson.

"Well, hardly that," laughed Hemming.  "I write for a living."

Mrs. Thomson nodded with satisfaction.

"The queen's son-in-law wrote a book," she said.

"I hardly do that kind," said Hemming, uneasily.

"I vum you don't, sir," cried the man, whacking the table, "not if
the missus means the book she read to me out of, oncet."

Hemming was pleased with the old man's shrewdness, though Mrs.
Thomson was shocked at his insinuations.

Hemming settled down in the cottage, much to the delight of the old
couple.  A fair-sized room on the ground floor was given over to him,
for bedroom and study.  The success of his last article had suggested
to him the writing of a book about what he knew, and had seen, of the
last brief campaign--something more lasting than his syndicate work,
and more carefully done.  This work would have colour, not too
heavily splashed on; style, not too aggressive; and dignity befitting
the subject.  He decided that he must prune his newspaper style
considerably for the book.  So he settled down to his work, and after
three days' honest labour, all that stood of it was the title, "Where
Might Is Right."  Strange to say, this seeming failure did not
discourage him.  He knew what he had to say, and felt that as soon as
the right note for the expression of it was struck, it would be easy
to go on.  The pages he so ruthlessly destroyed were splendid
newspaper copy, but he knew the objection thinking men have to
finding newspaper work between the covers of a book.  But at last the
opening chapter was done to his taste; and after that the work was
easy and pleasant.  It soon became his habit to get out of bed in
time to breakfast with Thomson, who was a thrifty market-gardener on
a small scale.  After his breakfast he smoked a cigar in the garden,
and sometimes told stories of his adventures to his host.  By eight
o'clock he was at his table, writing rapidly, but not steadily, until
twelve o'clock.  After the simple midday dinner he walked for several
hours, and seldom went back to his work until candle-time.  In this
way, with books and magazines sent down every week from London, he
managed to put in his time without letting himself think too often of
Molly Travers.  Nothing in the village reminded him of her, and his
healthy days brought him, for the most part, dreamless nights.

The old people were immensely interested in Hemming and his work.
They even persuaded him to read some of the chapters of his book
aloud to them.  It was plain to Hemming that Mrs. Thomson's signs of
appreciation were matters more of the heart than the head; but not so
with Thomson.  He would applaud a convincing argument or a
well-turned sentence by slapping his hand on his knee, and for hours
after a reading would sit by the chimney and mumble curses on the
heads of the Turks.  One morning, while Hemming was watching him at
his work, he turned from the bonfire he had been tending and, without
preamble, grasped his lodger's hand.

"You've a power of brains inside your head, sir," he said, with
vehemence.  Hemming felt that, even from O'Rourke, he had never
received a more pleasing compliment.  He rewarded the gaffer with a
cigar from his own case.

By Christmas "Where Might Is Right" was finished, and posted to a
London publisher.  With this work done, restlessness returned to
Hemming.  He fought it off for awhile, but at last packed a bag with
his best clothes, and, telling Mrs. Thomson to take care of his
letters until his return, went up to London.  First of all he called
on the publishers to whom he had sent his book.  The manager was in,
and received Hemming cordially.  He said that he had not yet looked
at Hemming's manuscript, and that at present it was in town, having
been taken away to a house-party by their literary adviser.  However,
he had followed Captain Hemming's career as a war-correspondent and
writer of army stories with interest, and felt that it was altogether
likely that the firm would want to do business with him.  The genial
glow of the season must have been in the gentleman's blood, for he
cordially invited Hemming to lunch with him at his club.  Upon
reaching the street Hemming found the fog, which had been scarcely
noticeable a short time before, was rapidly thickening.

"Let us walk--it is but a step," said the publisher, "and I've made
the trip in every kind of weather for the last twenty years."

On the steps of the club Hemming stumbled against a crouched figure.
There was a dull yellow glare from the lamp above, and by it Hemming
saw the beggar's bloated, hungry face, bedraggled red beard, and
trembling hand.  The eyes were cunning and desperate, but pitiful
just then.  Hemming passed the poor fellow a coin,--a two-shilling
piece,--and followed his guide into the warm, imposing hall of the
club, wondering where he had seen those unscrupulous eyes before.
The club was brightly lighted.  The lunch was long and complicated
and very good.  The publisher was vastly entertaining, and seemed in
no hurry to get back to his work.  Hemming's thoughts, in spite of
the cheer, busied themselves with the beggar on the steps.

"Did you notice the beggar outside?" he asked, at last.

"The chap with the bushy beard?--why, yes, he is new to this
quarter," replied the other.

"He was a desperate-looking devil, and I think the beard was false,"
remarked Hemming.  But as his host did not seem interested in either
the beggar or his beard, the subject was dropped.

Next day, with an unnamed hope in his heart that something might
happen, Hemming passed the Travers house.  But the hope died at sight
of it, for it was clearly unoccupied!  He remained in town a few days
longer, seeking familiar faces in familiar haunts, and finding none
to his mind.  He thought it strange that romance, and everything
worth while, should have deserted the great city in so brief a time.
But, for that matter, when he came to think of it, the whole world
had lost colour.  He decided that he was growing old--and perhaps too
wise.  After standing the genial publisher a dinner, and receiving a
promise of a speedy decision on "Where Might Is Right," he returned
to Maidmill-on-Dee, to spend weary months awaiting rumour of war.  At
last the rumour came, closely followed by sailing orders.




CHAPTER IX.

O'ROURKE TELLS A SAD STORY

Upon his arrival in New York, Hemming called immediately upon Mr.
Dodder, in the New York News Syndicate Building on Fulton Street.  He
found the manager even stouter than at the time of their first
meeting, and of a redder countenance.  His manner was as cordial as
before, but his mood was not so jovial.

"I am always worrying about something or other, and just now it is my
health," he told Hemming.  "You don't know what I'd give, captain,
for a life like yours--and a good hard body like yours.  But I can't
drop this job now.  It's the very devil, I can tell you, to have
one's brain and nerves jumping and twanging all the time, while one's
carcass lolls about and puts on fat.  I'm sorry I was so smart when I
was a kid.  Otherwise the old man would not have sent me to college,
and I'd never have hustled myself into this slavery.  My father was a
lumberman, and so was my grandfather.  They had big bodies, just like
mine, but they lived the right kind of lives for their bodies."

Hemming felt sorry for him.  He saw that the gigantic body was at
strife with the manner of life to which it was held, and that the
same physique that had proved itself a blessing to the lumberman, was
a menace to the desk-worker.

"Better take a few months in the woods," he suggested.

Dodder laughed bitterly.  "You might just as well advise me to take a
few months in heaven," he said.

Hemming asked for news of O'Rourke.

The manager's face lighted.

"O'Rourke," he exclaimed, "is a man wise in his generation.  Shackles
of gold couldn't hold that chap from his birthright of freedom.  He
did us some fine work for a time,--rode with Gomez and got his news
out somehow or other,--but went under with enteric and left Cuba.  We
kept him on, of course, but as soon as he could move around again he
resigned his position.  He said he had some very pressing business
affair to see to."

"Is he well again?" asked Hemming, anxiously.

"Oh, yes, he's able to travel," replied Dodder.  "He was here only a
week ago.  He seems to be making a tour of the Eastern cities.  I
guess he's looking for something."

"An editor, likely, who has lost some of his manuscripts," remarked
Hemming.

"Or a girl," said the other.

"Why a girl?" asked the Englishman.

Dodder smiled pensively.  "I like to think so," he said, "for though
I am nothing but a corpulent business slave myself, I've a fine
active brain for romance, and the heart of a Lochinvar."

Hemming nodded gravely.  Dodder laughed at him.  "You are thinking
what a devilish big horse I need," he said.

They dined together that evening at the Reform Club, and Hemming was
amazed at the quantity of food the big man consumed.  He had seen
O'Rourke, the long, lean, and broad, sit up to some hearty meals
after a day in the saddle, but never had he met with an appetite like
Dodder's.  It was the appetite of his ancestral lumbermen, changed a
little in taste, perhaps, but the same in vigour.

War was in order between the United States of America and Spain.
General Shafter's army was massing in Tampa, Florida, and Hemming,
with letters from the syndicate, started for Washington to procure a
pass from the War Office.  But on the night before his departure from
New York came news from London of his book, and the first batch of
proof-sheets for correction.  He worked until far into the morning,
and mailed the proofs, together with a letter, before breakfast.
Arriving in Washington, he went immediately to the War Department
building, and handed in his letters.  The clerk returned and asked
him to follow to an inner room.  There he found a pale young man,
with an imposing, closely printed document in his hand.

"Captain Hemming?" inquired the gentleman.

Hemming bowed.

"Your credentials are correct," continued the official, "and the
Secretary of War has signed your passport.  Please put your name
here."

Hemming signed his name on the margin of the document, folded it, and
stowed it in a waterproof pocketbook, and bowed himself out.  He was
about to close the door behind him when the official called him back.

"You forgot something, captain," said the young man, holding a packet
made up of about half a dozen letters toward him.

"Not I," replied Hemming.  He glanced at the letters, and read on the
top one "Bertram St. Ives O'Rourke, Esq."

"O'Rourke," he exclaimed.

"How stupid of me," cried the young man.

"Where is he?  When was he here?" inquired Hemming.  "He is a
particular friend of mine," he added.

The official considered for a second or two.

"Tall chap with a yellow face and a silk hat, isn't he?" he asked.

"Tall enough," replied Hemming, "but he had neither a yellow face nor
a silk hat when I saw him last--that was in Jamaica, about a year
ago."

At that moment the door opened and O'Rourke entered.  Without
noticing Hemming he gave a folded paper to the clerk.

"You'll find that right enough," he said--and then his eye lighted
upon his old comrade.  He grasped the Englishman by the shoulders and
shook him backward and forward, grinning all the while a wide, yellow
grin.

"My dear chap," protested Hemming, "where have you been to acquire
this demonstrative nature?"

"Lots of places.  Come and have a drink," exclaimed O'Rourke.

"I'll mail that to your hotel," called the pale young man after them,
as they hurried out.

"What are you up to now, my son?" inquired Hemming, critically
surveying the other's faultless attire.  "You look no end of a toff,
in spite of your yellow face."

"Thanks, and I feel it," replied his friend, "but my release is at
hand, for to-night I shall hie me to mine uncle's and there deposit
these polite and costly garments.  Already my riding-breeches and
khaki tunic are airing over the end of my bed."

"But why this grandeur, and this wandering about from town to town?"
asked Hemming.  He caught the quick look of inquiry on his friend's
face.  "Dodder told me you'd been aimlessly touring through the
Eastern States," he added.

"Here we are--come in and I'll tell you about it," replied O'Rourke.
They entered the Army and Navy Club, and O'Rourke, with a
very-much-at-home air, led the way to a quiet inner room.

"I suppose we'll split the soda the same old way--as we did before
sorrow and wisdom came to us," sighed O'Rourke.  He gave a familiar
order to the attentive waiter.  Hemming looked closely at his
companion, and decided that the lightness was only a disguise.

"Tell me the yarn, old boy--I know it's of more than fighting and
fever," he said, settling himself comfortably in his chair.

O'Rourke waited until the servant had deposited the glasses and
retired.  Then he selected two cigars from his case with commendable
care, and, rolling one across the table, lit the other.  He inhaled
the first draught lazily.

"These are deuced fine cigars," remarked Hemming.  O'Rourke nodded
his head, and, with his gaze upon the blue drift of smoke, began his
story.

"I was in a very bad way when I got out of that infernal island last
time.  I had a dose of fever that quite eclipsed any of my former
experiences in that line--also a bullet-hole in the calf of my left
leg.  Maybe you noticed my limp, and thought I was feigning gout.  A
tug brought me back to this country, landing me at Port Tampa.  Some
patriotic Cubans were waiting for me, and I made the run up to Tampa
in a car decorated with flags.  I wore my Cuban uniform, you know,
and must have looked more heroic than I felt."

Hemming raised his eyebrows at that.

"I'm a major in the Cuban army--the devil take it," explained
O'Rourke.

"The patriots escorted me to a hotel," he continued, "but the manager
looked at my banana-hued face and refused to have anything to do with
me at any price.  Failing in this, my tumultuous friends rushed me to
a wooden hospital, at the end of a river of brown sand which the
inhabitants of that town call an avenue.  I was put to bed in the
best room in the place, and then my friends hurried away, each one to
find his own doctor to offer me.  I was glad of the quiet, for I felt
about as beastly as a man can feel without flickering out entirely.
I don't think my insides just then would have been worth more than
two cents to any one but a medical student.  The matron--at least
that's what they called her--came in to have a look at me, and ask me
questions.  She was young, and she was pretty, and her impersonal
manner grieved me even then.  I might have been a dashed pacifico for
all the interest she showed in me, beyond taking my temperature and
ordering the fumigation of my clothes.  I wouldn't have felt so badly
about it if she had not been a lady--but she was, sure enough, and
her off-hand treatment very nearly made me forget my cramps and
visions of advancing land-crabs.  During the next few days I didn't
know much of anything.  When my head felt a little clearer, the
youthful matron brought me a couple of telegrams.  I asked her to
open them, and read them to me.  Evidently my Cuban friends had
reported the state of my health, and other things, for both telegrams
were tender inquiries after my condition.

"'You seem to be a person of some importance,' she said, regarding me
as if I were a specimen in a jar.

"'My name is O'Rourke,' I murmured.  For awhile she stared at me in a
puzzled sort of way.  Suddenly she blushed.

"'I beg your pardon, Mr. O'Rourke,' she said, and sounded as if she
meant it.  I felt more comfortable, and sucked my ration of milk and
lime-water with relish.  Next day the black orderly told me that the
matron was Miss Hudson, from somewhere up North.  He didn't know just
where.  I gave him a verbal order on the hospital for a dollar.

"Presently Miss Hudson came in and greeted me cheerfully.  'Why do
you want Harley to have a dollar?' she asked.

"'Just for a tip,' I replied, wearily.

"'He is paid to do his work, and if some patients fee him, the poorer
ones will suffer,' she said.

"'But I want him to have it, please.  He told me your name,' I said.

"She paid no more attention to this foolish remark than if I had
sneezed.  Indeed, even less, for if I had sneezed she would have
taken my pulse or my temperature.  I watched her as she moved about
the room seeing that all was clean and in order.

"'Miss Hudson,' I said, gaining courage, 'will you tell me what is
going on in the world?  Have you a New York paper?'

"'Yes, some papers have come for you,' she answered, 'and I will read
to you for a little while, if you feel strong enough to listen.
There is a letter, too.  Shall I open it for you?'

"She drew a chair between my bed and the window, and, first of all,
examined the letter.

"'From the New York News Syndicate,' she said.

"'Then it's only a check,' I sighed.

"'I shall put it away with the money you had when you came,' she
said.  She opened a paper, glanced at it, and wrinkled her white brow
at me.

"'Are you the Bertram St. Ives O'Rourke?" she asked.

"'No, indeed,' I replied.  'He has been dead a long time.  He was an
admiral in the British navy.'

"'I have never heard of him,' she answered, 'but there is a man with
that name who writes charming little stories, and verses, too, I
think.'

"'Oh, that duffer,' I exclaimed, faintly.

"She laughed quietly.  'There is an article about him here--at least
I suppose it is the same man.'  She glanced down the page and then up
at me.  'An angel unawares,' she laughed, and chaffed me kindly about
my modesty.

"After that we became better friends every day, though she often
laughed at the way some of the papers tried to make a hero of me.
That hurt me, because really I had gone through some awful messes,
and been sniped at a dozen times.  The Spaniards had a price on my
head.  I told her that, but she didn't seem impressed.  As soon as I
was able to see people, my friends the Cuban cigar manufacturers
called upon me, singly and in pairs, each with a gift of cigars.
These are out of their offerings.  The more they did homage to me,
the less seriously did Miss Hudson seem to regard my heroism.  But
she liked me--yes, we were good friends."

O'Rourke ceased talking and pensively flipped the ash off his cigar.
Leaning back in his chair, he stared at the ceiling.

"Well?" inquired his friend.  O'Rourke returned to the narration of
his experience with a visible effort.

"After awhile she read to me, for half an hour or so, every day.  One
evening she read a ballad of my own; by gad, it was fine.  But then,
even the _Journal_ sounded like poetry when she got hold of it.  From
that we got to talking about ourselves to each other, and she told me
that she had learned nursing, after her freshman year at Vassar,
because of a change in her father's affairs.  She had come South with
a wealthy patient, and, after his recovery, had accepted the position
of matron, or head nurse, of that little hospital.  In return, I
yarned away about my boyhood, my more recent adventures, my friends,
and my ambitions.  At last my doctor said I could leave the hospital,
but must go North right away.  My leg was healed, but otherwise I
looked and felt a wreck.  I was so horribly weak, and my nights
continued so crowded with suffering and delirium, that I feared my
constitution was ruined.  I tried to keep myself in hand when Miss
Hudson was around, but she surely guessed that I loved her."

"What's that?" interrupted Hemming.

"I said that I loved her," retorted O'Rourke, defiantly.

"Go ahead with the story," said the Englishman.

"When the time came for my departure," continued O'Rourke, "and the
carriage was waiting at the curb, I just kissed her hand and left
without saying a word.  I came North and got doctors to examine me.
They said that my heart and lungs were right as could be, and that
the rest of my gear would straighten up in time.  They promised even
a return of my complexion with the departure of the malaria from my
blood.  But I must live a quiet life for awhile, they said; so to
begin the quiet life I returned to Tampa, and that hospital.  But I
did not find the girl."

"Was she hiding?" inquired Hemming.  "Perhaps she had heard some
stories to your discredit."

"No," said O'Rourke, "she had resigned, and left the town, with her
father.  Evidently her troubles were ended--just as mine were begun."

"What did you do about it?" asked Hemming, whose interest was
thoroughly aroused.

"Oh, I looked for her everywhere--in Boston, and New York, and
Baltimore, and Washington, and read all the city directories,"
replied the disconsolate lover, "but I do not know her father's first
name, and you have no idea what a lot of Hudsons there are in the
world."

Hemming discarded the butt of his cigar, and eyed his friend
contemplatively.

"I suppose you looked in the registers of the Tampa hotels?" he
queried.  "The old chap's name and perhaps his address would be
there."

O'Rourke started from his chair, with dismay and shame written on his
face.

"Sit down and have another," said Hemming; "we'll look it up in a few
days."




CHAPTER X.

LIEUTENANT ELLIS IS CONCERNED

By the time Hemming and O'Rourke reached Tampa, about thirty thousand
men had gone under canvas in the surrounding pine groves and
low-lying waste places.  There were Westerners and Easterners,
regulars and volunteers, and at Port Tampa a regiment of coloured
cavalry.  Troops were arriving every day.  Colonel Wood and
Lieutenant-Colonel Roosevelt, with their splendid command of mounted
infantry, had just pitched their shelter-tents in a place of scrub
palmetto, behind the big hotel.  Taken altogether, it was an army
that made Hemming stare.

The friends went to a quiet hotel with wide verandas, cool rooms,
open fireplaces, and what proved equally attractive, reasonable
rates.  They inquired of the clerk about Mr. Hudson.  He remembered
the gentleman well, though he had spent only two days in the place.
"He had a daughter with him," the man informed them, and, turning to
the front of the register, looked up the name.  "There's the
signature, sir, and you're welcome to it," he said.  The
correspondents examined it intently for some time.

"We know that _that_ means Hudson," remarked O'Rourke, at last, "and
I should guess _John_ for the other sprawl."

"Sprawl is good," said Hemming, straightening his monocle, "but any
one can see that _Robert_ is the name."

"I've put a lot of study on it," said the clerk, "and so has the
boss, and we've about agreed to call it _Harold_."

"Take your choice," said O'Rourke, "but tell me what you make of the
address."

"Boston," cried the clerk.

They stared at him.  "You were all ready," said Hemming.

"Yes, sir," he replied, "for I've been thinking it over for some
time."

"Why the devil didn't you ask him?" inquired O'Rourke, fretfully.

"Lookee here, colonel," said the hotel man, "if you know Mr. Hudson,
you know darn well why I didn't ask him where he came from."

"High and haughty?" queried O'Rourke.

The clerk nodded.

"You had better reconsider your course, old chap," laughed the
Englishman.

His friend did not reply.  He was again intent on the register.

"I make seven letters in it," he said, "and I'll swear to that for an
N."

"N nothing," remarked the clerk; "that's a B."

"Yes, it is a B, I think, and to me the word looks like--well, like
Balloon," said Hemming.

O'Rourke sighed.  "Of course it is New York; see the break in the
middle, and a man is more likely to come from there than from a
balloon," he said.

"Some men go away in balloons, sir," suggested the clerk.

Just then the proprietor of the hotel entered and approached the
desk.  He Was an imposing figure of a man, tall and deep, and
suitably dressed in the roomiest of light tweeds.  His face was round
and clever.  He shook hands with the new arrivals.

"Military men, I believe," he said.

"Not just now," replied Hemming.

"Do you know where Mr. Hudson is at present?" asked O'Rourke, in
casual tones.

"Mr. Hudson, of Philadelphia?  Why, no, sir, I can't say that I do,"
answered the big man.

"How do you know he's of Philadelphia?" asked the Englishman.

"He wrote it in the register; look for yourself," was the reply.

"No," said O'Rourke, mournfully, "but it is a very dry evening, and
if you will honour us with your company as far as the bar, Mr.--"

"Stillman,--delighted, sir," hastily replied the proprietor.

The three straightway sought that cool retreat, leaving the clerk to
brood, with wrinkled brow, above the puzzle so unconsciously donated
to him by a respectable one-time guest.

The weary delay in that town of sand and disorder at last came to an
end, and Hemming and O'Rourke, with their passports countersigned by
General Shafter, went aboard the _Olivette_.  Most of the newspaper
men were passengers on the same boat.  During the rather slow trip,
they made many friends and a few enemies.  One of the friends was a
youth with a camera, sent to take pictures for the same weekly paper
which O'Rourke represented.  The landing in Cuba of a part of the
invading forces and the correspondents was made at Baiquiri, on the
southern coast.  The woful mismanagement of this landing has been
written about often enough.  O'Rourke and Hemming, unable to procure
horses, set off toward Siboney on foot, and on foot they went through
to Santiago with the ragged, hungry, wonderful army.  They did their
work well enough, and were thankful when it was over.  Hemming
admired the American army--up to a certain grade.  Part of the time
they had a merry Toronto journalist for messmate, a peaceful family
man, who wore a round straw hat and low shoes throughout the
campaign.  During the marching (but not the fighting), O'Rourke
happened upon several members of his old command.  One of the
meetings took place at midnight, when the Cuban warrior was in the
act of carrying away Hemming's field-glasses and the Toronto man's
blanket.

After the surrender of Santiago, Hemming received word to cover Porto
Rico.  He started at the first opportunity in a gunboat that had once
been a harbour tug.  O'Rourke, who was anxious to continue his still
hunt for the lady who had nursed him, returned to Florida, and from
thence to New York.

In Porto Rico Hemming had an easy and pleasant time.  He struck up an
acquaintance that soon warmed to intimacy with a young volunteer
lieutenant of infantry, by name Ellis.  Ellis was a quiet,
well-informed youth; in civil life a gentleman-at-large with a
reputation as a golfer.  With his command of sixteen men he was
stationed just outside of Ponce, and under the improvised canvas
awning before his door he and Hemming exchanged views and
confidences.  One evening, while the red eyes of their green cigars
glowed and dimmed in the darkness, Hemming told of his first meeting
with O'Rourke.  He described the little boat tossing toward them from
the vast beyond, the poncho bellied with the wind, and the lean,
undismayed adventurer smoking at the tiller.  Ellis sat very quiet,
staring toward the white tents of his men.

"Is that the same O'Rourke who was once wounded in Cuba, and later
nearly died of fever in Tampa?" he asked, when Hemming was through.

"Yes, the same man," said Hemming, "and as decent a chap as ever put
foot in stirrup.  Do you know him?"

"No, but I have heard a deal about him," replied the lieutenant.  It
did not surprise Hemming that a man should hear about O'Rourke.
Surely the good old chap had worked hard enough (in his own daring,
vagrant way) for his reputation.  He brushed a mosquito away from his
neck, and smoked on in silence.

"I have heard a--a romance connected with your friend O'Rourke," said
Ellis, presently, in a voice that faltered.  Hemming pricked up his
ears at that.

"So have I.  Tell me what you have heard," he said.

"It is not so much what I've heard, as who I heard it from," began
the lieutenant, "and it's rather a personal yarn.  I met a girl, not
long ago, and we seemed to take to each other from the start.  I saw
her frequently, and I got broken up on her.  Then I found out that,
though she liked me better than any other fellow in sight, she did
not love me one little bit.  She admired my form at golf, and
considered my conversation edifying, but when it came to love, why,
there was some one else.  Then she told me about O'Rourke.  She had
nursed him in Tampa for several months, just before the time old
Hudson had recaptured his fortune."

"O'Rourke told me something about it," said Hemming.  "He thought, at
the time, that he was an invalid for life, so he did not let her know
how he felt about her.  Afterward the doctors told him he was sound
as a bell, and ever since--barring this last Cuban business--he has
been looking for her."

"But he does not know that she loves him?" queried Ellis.

"I really couldn't say," replied Hemming.

Ellis shifted his position, and with deft fingers rerolled the leaf
of his moist cigar.  In a dim sort of way he wondered if he could
give up the girl.  In time, perhaps, she would love him--if he could
keep O'Rourke out of sight.  A man in the little encampment began to
sing a sentimental negro melody.  The clear, sympathetic tenor rang,
like a bugle-call, across the stagnant air.  A banjo, with its wilful
pathos, tinkled and strummed.

"Listen! that is Bolls, my sergeant.  He is a member of the Harvard
Glee Club," said the lieutenant.

Hemming listened, and the sweet voice awoke the bitter memories.
Presently he asked: "What is Miss Hudson's address?"

"She is now in Europe, with her father," replied his companion.
"Their home is in Marlow, New York State."

"May I let O'Rourke know?" asked Hemming.

"Certainly," replied Ellis, scarce above a whisper.  He wondered what
nasty, unsuspected devil had sprung to power within him, keeping him
from telling that the home in Marlow was by this time in the hands of
strangers, and that the Hudsons intended living in New York after
their return from Europe.

O'Rourke had asked Hemming to write to him now and then, to the Army
and Navy Club at Washington, where the letters would be sure to find
him sooner or later; so Hemming wrote him the glad information from
Porto Rico.




CHAPTER XI.

HEMMING DRAWS HIS BACK PAY

Hemming walked down Broadway on the morning of a bright November day.
The hurrying crowds on the pavements, however weary at heart, looked
glad and eager in the sunlight.  The stir of the wide street got into
his blood, and he stepped along with the air of one bound upon an
errand that promised more than money.  He entered a cigar store, and
filled his case with Turkish cigarettes.  Some newspapers lay on the
counter, but he turned away from them, for he was sick of news.
Further along, he glanced into the windows of a book-shop.  His gaze
alighted upon the figure of a Turkish soldier.  Across the width of
the sheet ran the magic words, "Where Might Is Right.  A Book of the
Greco-Turkish War.  By Herbert Hemming."

As one walks in a dream, Hemming entered the shop.  "Give me a copy
of that book," he said.

"I beg your pardon, sir?" inquired the shopman.

Hemming recovered his wits.

"I want a copy of 'Where Might Is Right,' by Hemming," he said.  He
laid aside his gloves and stick, and opened the book with loving
hands.  His first book.  The pride of it must have been very apparent
on his tanned face, for the man behind the counter smiled.

"I have read that book myself," ventured the man.  "I always read a
book that I sell more than twenty copies of in one day."

Hemming glowed, and continued his scrutiny of the volume.  On one of
the first pages was printed, "Authorized American Edition."  The name
of the publishers was S----'s Sons.

"Where do S----'s Sons hang out?" he asked, as he paid for the book.

"Just five doors below this," said the man.

"I'll look in there," decided Hemming, "before I call on Dodder."

The war correspondent was cordially received by the head of the great
publishing house.  He was given a comprehensive account of the
arrangements made between his London and New York publishers, and
these proved decidedly satisfactory.  The business talk over, Hemming
prepared to go.

"I hope you will look me up again before you leave town," said the
head of the firm, as they shook hands.

Arrived in the outer office of the New York News Syndicate, Hemming
inquired for Mr. Dodder.  The clerk stared at him with so strange an
expression that his temper suffered.

"Well, what the devil is the matter?" he exclaimed.

"Mr. Dodder is dead," replied the youth.  Just then Wells came from
an inner room, caught sight of the Englishman, and approached.

"So you're back, are you?" he remarked, with his hands in his
pockets.  Hemming was thinking of the big, kind-hearted manager, and
replied by asking the cause of his death.  "Apoplexy.  Are you ready
to sail for the Philippines?  Why didn't you wait in Porto Rico for
orders?" he snapped.

"Keep cool, my boy," said Hemming's brain to Hemming's heart.
Hemming himself said, with painful politeness: "I can be ready in two
days, Mr. Wells, but first we must make some new arrangements as to
expenses and salary."

"Do you think you are worth more than you get?" sneered Wells.  "Has
that book that you wrote, when we were paying you to do work for us,
given you a swelled head?"

Hemming was about to reply when an overgrown young man, a bookkeeper,
who had been listening, nudged his elbow roughly.

"Here's your mail," he said.

Hemming placed the half-dozen letters in his pocket.  His face was
quite pale, considering the length of time he had been in the
tropics.  He took the overgrown youth by the front of his jacket and
shook him.  Then he twirled him deftly and pushed him sprawling
against his enraged employer.  Both went down, swearing viciously.
The other inmates of the great room stared and waited.  Most of them
looked pleased.  An office boy, who had received notice to leave that
morning, sprang upon a table.  "Soak it to 'em, Dook.  Soak it to
'em, you bang-up Chawley.  Dey can't stand dat sort o' health food."

Wells got to his feet.  The bookkeeper scrambled up and rushed at
Hemming.  He was received in a grip that made him repent his action.

"Mr. Wells," said Hemming, "I shall hold on to this gentleman, who
does not seem to know how to treat his superiors, until he cools off,
and in the meantime I'll trouble you for what money is due me, up to
date.  Please accept my resignation at the same time."

"I'll call a copper," sputtered Wells.

The door opened, and the head of the publishing house of S----'s Sons
entered.

"Good Lord, what is the trouble?" he cried.

"I am trying to draw my pay," explained Hemming.

The new arrival looked at the ruffled, confused Wells with eyes of
contempt and suspicion.

"I'll wait for you, Mr. Hemming, on condition that you will lunch
with me," he cried.

A few minutes later they left the building, and in his pocket Hemming
carried a check for the sum of his back pay.

"In a month from now," said his companion, "that concern will not be
worth as much as your check is written for.  Even poor old Dodder had
all he could do to hold it together.  He had the brains and decency,
and that fellow had the money."

By the time lunch was over, Hemming found himself once more in
harness, but harness of so easy a fit that not a buckle galled.  The
billet was a roving commission from S----'s Sons to do articles of
unusual people and unusual places for their illustrated weekly
magazine.  He spent the afternoon in reading and writing letters.  He
advised every one with whom he had dealings of his new headquarters.
He had a good collection of maps, and sat up until three in the
morning pondering over them.  Next day he bought himself a camera,
and overhauled his outfit.  By the dawn of the third day after his
separation from the syndicate, he had decided to start northward,
despite the season.

The clamour of battle was no longer his guide.  Now the Quest of the
Little-Known was his.  It brought him close to many hearths, and
taught him the hearts of all sorts and conditions of men.  In the
span of a few years, it made him familiar with a hundred villages
between Nain in the North and Rio de Janeiro in the South.  He found
comfort under the white lights of strange cities, and sought peace in
various wildernesses.  Under the canvas roof and the bark, as under
the far-shining shelters of the town, came ever the dream of his old
life for bedfellow.



END OF PART I.




PART TWO



CHAPTER I.

THE UNSUSPECTED CITY

Hemming happened upon the city of Pernamba on the evening of a sultry
day in April.  He manifested no surprise beyond straightening his
monocle in his eye.

"Hope they have some English soda-water down there," he said to the
heavy foliage about him, "but I suppose it would be hardly fair to
expect an ice factory so far from the coast."  For a second a vision
of tall glasses and ice that clinked came to his mind's eye.  He
remembered the cool dining-rooms of his friends in Pernambuco.  He
spurred his native-bred steed to a hesitating trot along the narrow,
hoof-worn path that led down to the valley.  At a mud and timber hut
set beneath banana-trees, and backed by a tiny field, he drew rein.
A woman sat before the door, looking cool and at ease in her scanty
cotton dress.  A naked child chased a pig among the bananas.  Hemming
greeted the woman in Portuguese.  She gave him humble greeting in
return.  The pig and the baby came near to listen.  Hemming swung his
feet free from the stirrups, to straighten the kink out of his knees.
He pushed back his pith helmet, and lit a cigarette.

"What is the name of the town?" he asked, smiling reassuringly.

The woman told him, standing respectfully on the earthen threshold.
Such square shoulders and clear eyes as this Englishman's were not
every-day sights in Pernamba.

"May a stranger find entertainment there?" he inquired.

"Yes," she replied, "and the great man who owns it is generous to
strangers.  He is a big man, full of wisdom, smoking eternally a
yellow cigar not of this country."

Hemming dismounted, the better to rest his horse.  Although he had
ridden all that day and the day before, he felt no fatigue himself.
The tropical sun, the narrow water-cut paths, and the clambering
vines held in the heated air and luring him with strange flowers,
brought him no terror.  But he polished his monocle and sighed
uneasily, for his store of _milreis_ had dwindled since leaving
Pernambuco a week before to a sum equalling about eleven pounds in
English money.

"Has this man an army?" he asked.

"Truly a great army," replied the woman, "for I have seen it myself,
riding after thieves.  It numbers five hundred men, all armed, and
wearing white tunics, and all paid for by this man.  He must be
richer than a king to support so grand an army."

Hemming smiled toward the white and red roofs and clumps of foliage
in the valley, thinking, maybe, of his own old regiment, of Aldershot
during a review, of the hill batteries that had supported the
infantry advance in India, and of the fifty regiments under canvas in
Tampa.

"I crave a drink," he said,--"a finger of your good casash in a bowl
of cool water."

The woman brought it, smiling with hospitality, and would not accept
the ragged bill which he held out to her.

"It is a pleasure," cried she, "to slake the thirst of so
distinguished a seor."

Hemming bowed gravely, a smile lifting his upturned, pale moustache.
The baby came close, on all fours, and examined his yellow
riding-boots and straight spurs.  Hemming patted the small one's limp
black hair.

"This is a kindly world," he said in English, then to the woman: "Let
thy son wear this ring,--see, it fits his thumb.  Should any man ask
the name of his friend, say it is Hemming, an Englishman."

He pushed the child gently toward its mother, and, swinging to his
saddle, rode down toward the city.  His gray eyes took in
everything,--the yellowing fruit, the fields of cane, the mud huts of
the poor, the thin horses of the charcoal-burners crowding out of the
trail to let him pass, and the patches of manioc.

All this he beheld with satisfaction.  In a thin book he made a note,
thus: "Pernamba, name of town evidently run by a governor of
independent spirit.  Army of 500, evidently mounted infantry.
Welcomed to outskirts of city by kind peasant woman, evening of April
6, 19--.  Same climate and crops as rest of Brazil.  Eleven pounds in
my pockets in Brazilian notes and small coin.  What does Pernamba
hold for H.H. I wonder?  A dinner or two, perhaps, and a couple of
chapters for my book."

Presently the twisting path met a highway between royal palms.
Good-sized villas, their walls all blue and white with glazed tiles,
their roofs dusky red, or else flat and railed about with white
stones, each in its separate garden.  The gardens were enclosed by
high walls of brick, such as he had seen many times in the resident
sections of Pernambuco.  For months he had lived in just such a
house, and lolled in just such a garden.

"The old Dutch influence," he said, tossing his cigarette over the
nearest wall.  A bullock-cart came creaking along the road, the
patient cattle, with heads held low and a straight yoke across their
wrinkled necks, the driver walking at their heels, sombre with dust,
and daintily puffing a cigarette.  The cart was loaded with sacks of
sugar, which sent up a heavy, sickly smell.  Hemming hailed the
driver.

"Where does the governor live, my friend?"

"The President, seor?  There behind the white panthers."  With the
stock of his rawhide whip, the fellow pointed to an iron gate, set
between posts of red brick, topped with marble panthers.  Each
panther held a shield between its front paws.  Hemming threw the
bullock-driver a coin, and rode on the pavement, the better to
examine the armorial design on the shields.  He laughed softly.

"Familiar," he said, "ah, yes, a good enough old Devonshire shield.
I have admired it in the dining-room of the Governor of Newfoundland.
Now I doff my hat to it at the entrance of a president's residence.
Dash it all, I have outgrown dismay, and a jolly good thing, too."
He flecked a leaf off his knee with the tip of his glove.

"Queer I never heard about this before,--and what the deuce is a
Brazilian doing with those arms?  Can this be where that crazy
American whom old Farrington told me about hangs out?"  His brow
cleared, and he bowed to the expressionless panthers.

A sentry, who had been standing a few paces off, with a cavalry sabre
at his shoulder and a cigarette in his mouth, now drew near and
saluted.  Hemming returned the salute sharply.  This same custom of
smoking on sentry-go had jarred on him many a time in Pernambuco.  He
had noticed the same thing in Bahia.

"I would see the President," he said, and passed his card to the
soldier.  From a small guard-house just inside the wall came several
more white-clad men.  One of these hurried away with Hemming's card,
and presently returned.  The gates were swung wide open; Hemming rode
in at a dress-parade trot, travel-stained, straight of back, his
monocle flashing in his eye.  Soldiers posted here and there among
the palms and roses and trim flower-beds stood at attention as he
passed.

He drew rein and dismounted at the foot of the marble steps.  A tall,
heavily built man, dressed in a black frock coat and white trousers,
came down to meet him.  A man in livery took his horse.

"Mr. Hemming," said the large man, "I am the President."  He popped a
fat, yellow cigar into his mouth, and shook hands.  "Come in," he
said.  He led the way into a large tiled room, containing a
billiard-table of the American kind, a roll-top desk, and an office
chair.  The windows of the room were all on one side, and opened on a
corner of the gardens, in which a fountain tossed merrily.  The
President sank into a chair in the easiest manner, and threw one leg
over the arm of it.  Then he noticed, with a quick twinkle in his
blue eyes, Hemming in the middle of the floor, erect and unsmiling.

"Mr. Hemming," he said, "I want your respect, but none of that
stiff-backed ceremony between gentlemen.  I am neither Roosevelt nor
Albert Edward.  Even Morgan is a bigger man than I am, though I still
hope.  You have been in the English army, and you like to have things
starched; well, so do I sometimes.  Please fall into that chair."

Hemming blushed and sat down.  The man was evidently crazy.  "My name
is Tetson," said the President.  He rang the bell and a native
servant entered.

"Thank you, a Scotch and soda," said Hemming.

"Ah, I knew it," laughed the other, "though I always take rye myself."

The servant bowed and retired.

"I see the illustrated weeklies of both New York and London,"
continued Tetson, "and I always look for your articles.  I like them.
I know something about your family, also, Hemming.  I have 'Burke's
Landed Gentry' and 'Who's Who' on my desk.  You are a grandson of Sir
Bertram Hemming of Barracker."

"Yes," replied Hemming, both surprised and embarrassed.

"Well," said the President, "I have some blood in me, too.  My
mother's grandmother was a Gostwycke.  Did you notice the three stars
and six choughs?"

"I know the head of your house at home, Colonel Bruce-Gostwycke, and
another distinguished member of it in the colonies, Sir Henry
Renton," replied Hemming.  "But," he continued, briskly, twisting his
moustache, "you are something bigger than that here.  Why do you hold
this little half-dead county family so high?"

"My mother in New York taught me to," replied Tetson, "and then this
business is different.  I did it, as you Englishmen say, off my own
bat.  A pile of money, a lot of gall, a little knowledge of the
weakness of men in office,--this is all about it.  Even now most of
my friends think me a fool."  He gravely relit his yellow cigar.  The
reek of it was worse than jerked beef to Hemming.  "I will tell you
my story some day, but now you want a shower-bath and a change.
Please consider yourself at home.  Sudden friendships may not be good
form in England, but they are all right back here."

"Ah," said Hemming, "I have brushed about a bit; I'm not such a--so
English as I look."

Tetson turned to the servant: "Tell Smith to look after Mr. Hemming.
Smith is a handy man.  You will find all kinds of cigarettes in his
keeping, and we shall dine at eight.  If you feel hungry in the
meantime, tell Smith."

He arose and shook hands.  Hemming followed the servant, inwardly
wondering, outwardly calm.  He had met many strange people in his
adventurous life, and had become accustomed to luck of every kind,
but this big President, with the yellow cigar, was beyond anything he
had ever dreamed.

"I am glad I was born with imagination, and have enjoyed the
enlightening society of O'Rourke in so many strange places," he
thought.

Smith proved to be a clean-shaven man, all in white and brass
buttons.  Hemming surveyed him with interest.

"I see that you are an Englishman, Smith," he said.

"No, sir," replied Smith, in faultless tones.  "I was born on the
Bowery.  But I have been in London, sir, yes, sir, with Mr. Tetson.
We haven't always lived in this 'ere 'ole."

It seemed to Hemming that the h's had been dropped with a certain
amount of effort on the man's part, and that his eyes twinkled in a
quite uncalled-for way.  But it did not bother him now.  Even a valet
may be allowed his joke.

Soon he was enjoying the luxury of a shower-bath in a great, cool
room, standing by itself in a vineyard and rose garden.  The shower
fell about six feet before it touched his head.  The roof of the
building was open to the peak, and a subdued light, leaf-filtered,
came down through a glass tile set in among the earthen ones.  The
walls and floor were of white and blue tiles.  The bath was of
marble, as large as an English billiard-table, and not unlike the
shallow basin of a fountain.

Cool and vigorous, Hemming stepped from the bath, replaced his
eye-glass, and lit a cigarette.  Swathed in a white robe, with his
feet in native slippers, he unlocked the door and issued into the
scented garden air.  Smith awaited him in the vine-covered alley,
holding a "swizzle" on a silver tray.  He drained the glass, and,
lifting up the hem of his robe, followed the valet back to the
dressing-room.  Chameleons darted across his path, and through the
palms floated the ringing notes of a bugle-call.

"I found your razors and your brushes in the saddle-bags," announced
Smith, "and these shirts, sir, I bought, guessing at your size, and--"

"What is this?" interrupted Hemming, holding aloft a white jacket
heavy with gold.

"Mess jacket of our regiment, sir.  The President would feel honoured
if you would wear it.  And these trousers were sent in by one of the
native officers, with his compliments," replied the valet.

Hemming curtly intimated his readiness to dress.  Smith closed the
shutters, turned on the lights, and examined a couple of razors.

Twenty minutes later, Herbert Hemming, in the mess uniform of a
colonel in the President of Pernamba's army, was ushered into the
presence of the family, and a certain Mr. Valentine Hicks.




CHAPTER II.

THE SPORTING PRESIDENT

The President's name was Harris William Tetson.  His wife had been
Mary Appleton, born of cultured parents in Philadelphia.  She
welcomed Hemming in the most friendly manner.  The third member of
the family was a tall girl, with a soft voice and an English accent.
She shook hands with Hemming, and he noticed that the pressure of her
hand was firm and steady, like that of a man's.  She wore glasses.
The light from the shaded candles glowed warm on her white neck and
arms.  Hemming had not expected to find any one like this in the
interior of South America.  He used to know girls like her at home,
and one in particular flashed into his memory with a pang of
bitterness.  In his agitation, he almost overlooked the extended hand
of Mr. Valentine Hicks.

The dinner was of great length.  A few of the dishes were American,
but most were of the country.  Two dusky servants waited upon the
diners.  The claret was to Hemming's taste, and, as he listened to
Miss Tetson describe an incident of her morning's ride, a feeling of
rest and homeliness came to him.  A little wind stole in from the
roses and fountains, and the man of wars and letters, great dreams
and unsung actions, saw, with wondering eyes, that it loosened a red
petal from the roses at her shoulder and dropped it upon her white
arm.  He looked up sharply, and only the light of genial friendship
remained in the eyes that met those of Valentine Hicks.  But Hicks
looked sulky; understanding came to the heart of Hemming.  At last
the dinner came to an end, and Tetson dropped the subject of freight
on sugar, and took up the lighter one of real estate.  Coffee was
brought; no one listened to Tetson, but he prosed on, his
good-natured face turned toward the shadows in the ceiling, a yellow
cigar stuck jauntily in his mouth.  Hemming was busy with his own
thoughts, wondering into what nest of lunatics his free-lancing had
brought him.  He longed for O'Rourke's help.  The girl drew something
from her bodice, and laid it before him.  It was a cigarette-case.

"You may take one, if you do not bore us by looking shocked," she
said.

Hemming drew forth a cigarette, and lit it at the nearest candle.
"As to being shocked," he replied, "why, I used to know a girl who--"
he stopped suddenly and glanced down at his coffee.  "Of course it is
quite the thing now," he added, in stilted tones.

Hicks refused a cigarette from the silver case, and moodily puffed at
a black native cigar.  Mrs. Tetson did not smoke, but entertained the
others with a description of her first and only attempt at the
recreation.

The little wind died away.  Outside, the fountain splashed sleepily.
The blood-red petal fell from the girl's arm to the whiter cloth.  A
flame-bewildered moth bungled into the President's coffee.  Hemming's
workaday brain was lulled to repose, and now he was only Hemming the
poet.  He looked into the eyes across the table.  But he had lived so
long with men, and the foolish, evident affairs of generals and
statesmen, that Miss Tetson's glances were as weapons for which he
knew no manual of defence.  They touched him more than he liked,
awaking in his hitherto disciplined memory a hundred fibres of broken
dreams.  And every fibre tingled like a nerve with a sweetness sharp
as pain,--and time swung back, and all the healing of his long exile
was undone.

When the ladies rose from the table, Mr. Tetson came over to Hemming
and nudged him confidentially.  He looked very sly.  "What d'ye say
to a game of billiards?" he whispered.

"Delighted," murmured Hemming, relieved that his strange host had not
suggested something worse.

"I like the game," continued Tetson, "but as Hicks is a damn fool at
it, I don't indulge very often.  Hicks is too young, anyway,--a nice
fellow, but altogether too young for men to associate with.  Trotting
'round with the girls is more in his line."

"Really," remarked the newcomer, uneasily.  He was not quite sure
whether or not Hicks had got out of ear-shot.

"Fact," said the President,--"cold truth.  Marion can't play, either.
I've had Santosa up several times for a game, but he's too dashed
respectful to beat me.  You'll not be that way, Hemming?"

"I should hope not," replied Hemming, absently, his eyes still turned
toward the door through which the rest of the party had vanished.

"What d'ye say to five dollars the game?" Tetson whispered.  The
adventurer's heart sank, but he followed his host to the
billiard-room with an unconcerned air.  They played until past
midnight, the President in his shirt-sleeves, with the yellow cigar
smouldering always.  A servant marked for them, and another uncorked
the soda-water.  After the last shot had been made, Valentine Hicks
strolled in, with his hands in his pockets and his brow clouded.

"Did the old man do you?" he inquired of Hemming.

The free-lance shook his head.  "I took ten pounds away from him," he
said.

The secretary whistled.




CHAPTER III.

THE POST OF HONOUR.--THE SECRETARY'S AFFAIR

Hemming awoke with a clear head, despite the President's whiskey, and
remembered, with satisfaction, the extra ten pounds.  His windows
were wide open, and a cool dawn wind came in across the gardens.  He
threw aside the sheet and went over to the middle window, and,
finding that the ledge extended to form a narrow balcony, stepped
outside.  Away to the right, he could mark a bend of the river by the
low-lying mist.  He sniffed the air.  "There is fever in it," he
said, and wondered how many kinds of a fool Mr. Tetson was.  He was
sorry for the ladies.  They did not look like the kind of people to
enjoy being shut away from the world in such a God-forsaken hole as
this.  Why didn't the old ass start a town on the coast? he asked
himself.  While engaged in these puzzling reflections, Smith rapped
at the door, and entered.  He carried coffee, a few slices of dry
toast, and a jug of shaving-water.

"Will you ride this morning, sir?" he asked.

"Why, yes," replied Hemming, and said he would be shaved before
drinking his coffee.  As the valet lathered his chin, he asked if the
President rode every morning.

"Not 'e, sir," replied the man, "but Miss Tetson does, and Mr. 'Icks."

Hemming found his well-worn riding-breeches brushed and folded, his
boots and spurs shining like the sun, and a new cotton tunic ready
for him.  He looked his surprise at sight of the last article.

"You didn't give me any order, sir," explained the man, "but, bein'
as I'm a bit of a tilor myself, I thought as 'ow you wouldn't mind--"

Hemming interrupted him with uplifted hand.

"It was very kind of you," he said, "and I am sure it is an excellent
fit.  See if you can't find a sovereign among that change on the
table."

As he rode through the great gates, Hemming caught sight of Miss
Tetson along the road.  At sound of his horse's hoofs, she turned in
her saddle and waved her hand.  He touched his little white stallion
into that renowned sliding run that had made it famous in Pernambuco.
They rode together for over an hour.  Hicks did not turn out that
morning.

Mr. Valentine Hicks was young, and an American.  Though he had been
born in Boston, he lacked something in breeding,--a very shadowy
something that would correct itself as life took him in hand.  Though
he had been an undergraduate of Harvard University for two years, he
displayed to Hemming's mind a childish ignorance of men and books.
No doubt he had practised the arts of drop-kicking and tackling with
distinction, for he was big and well muscled.  He was distantly
connected with the Tetsons, and had joined them in Pernamba soon
after their arrival in the country, and two years previous to the
opening of this narrative, to act as Tetson's private secretary.  At
first Mr. Hicks looked with suspicion upon the wandering Englishman.
He was in an unsettled frame of mind at the time, poor fellow.  He
saw in Hemming a dangerous rival to his own monopoly of Miss Tetson.
Already the lady was talking about some sort of book the duffer had
written.

A few days after Hemming's arrival, the army, to the number of four
hundred rank and file and twenty-six officers, was drawn up for the
President's inspection.  Hemming rode with Tetson, and the little
brown soldiers wondered at the frosty glitter of his eye-glass.  His
mount was the same upon which he had entered the country,--a white,
native-bred stallion, the gift of one McPhey, a merchant in
Pernambuco.  Miss Tetson and Hicks, each followed by a groom, trotted
aimlessly about the waiting ranks, much to Hemming's disgust.  Tetson
lit the inevitable yellow weed.

"What do you think of them?" he asked, waving his hand toward the
troops.

"They look to me as if they were stuffed with bran," answered the
Englishman, "and their formation is all wrong."

"Ah," said Tetson, sadly crestfallen.

Presently he touched Hemming's knee.

"If you will take them in hand,--the whole lopsided consignment, from
the muddy-faced colonel down,--why, I'll be your everlasting friend,"
he said.

Hemming stared at them, pondering.

"It will mean enemies for me," he replied.

"No, I can answer for everything but their drill," said the other.

Hemming saluted, and, wheeling the white stallion, rode alone up and
down the uneven ranks.  His face was set in severe lines, but behind
the mask lurked mirth and derision at the pettiness of his
high-styled office.

"Commander-in-chief," he said, and, putting his mount to a canter,
completely circled his command in a fraction of a minute.

"I shall begin to lick them into shape to-morrow," he said to Tetson.

The little officers, clanging their big cavalry sabres, marched their
little brown troops away to the barracks.  The President looked
wistfully after them, and said: "I can mount three hundred of them,
Hemming.  I call it a pretty good army, for all its lack of style."

"I call it half a battalion of duffers," said Hemming to himself.

Later, the new commander-in-chief and the private secretary sat
together in the former's quarters.

"I do not quite understand this Pernamba idea," said Hemming.  "Is it
business, or is it just an unusual way of spending money?"

"I don't know what the old man is driving at myself," replied Hicks,
"but of one thing I am sure: there's more money put into it than
there is in it.  The army is a pretty expensive toy, for instance.
Just what it is for I do not know.  The only job it ever tried was
collecting rents, and it made a mess of that.  We don't sell enough
coffee in a year to stand those duffers a month's pay.  We get
skinned right and left back here and down on the coast.  Mr. Tetson
thinks he still possesses a clear business head, but the fact is he
cannot understand his own bookkeeping.  It's no fun running a
hundred-square-mile ranch, with a fair-sized town thrown in."

Hemming wrinkled his forehead, and stared vacantly out of the window.
Below him a gray parrot, the property of Miss Tetson, squawked in an
orange-tree.

"If I had money, I should certainly live somewhere else.  Why the
devil he keeps his wife and daughter here, I don't see."

Just then the secretary caught the faint strumming of a banjo, and
left hurriedly, without venturing an explanation.  He found Miss
Tetson in her favourite corner of the garden, where roses grew
thickest, and breadfruit-trees made a canopy of green shade.  A
fountain splashed softly beside the stone bench whereon she sat, and
near by stood a little brown crane watching the water with eyes like
yellow jewels.

The girl had changed from her riding-habit into a white gown, such as
she wore almost every day.  But now Hicks saw her with new eyes.  She
seemed to him more beautiful than he had dreamed a woman could be.
Yesterday he had thought, in his indolent way, that he loved her.
Now he knew it, and his heart seemed to leap and pause in a mad sort
of fear.  The look of well-fed satisfaction passed away from him.  He
stood there between the roses like a fool,--he who had come down to
the garden so carelessly, with some jest on his lips.

"Something will happen now," she said, and smiled up at him.  Hicks
wondered what she meant.

"It is too hot to have anything happen," he replied.

"That is the matter with us,--it is too hot, always too hot, and we
are too tired," she said, "but Mr. Hemming does not seem to mind the
heat.  I think that something interesting will happen now."

This was like a knife in the man's heart, for he was learning to like
the Englishman.

The girl looked at the little crane by the fountain.  Hicks stood for
a moment, trying to smile.  But it was hard work to look as if he did
not care.  "Lord, what an ass I have been," he said to himself, but
aloud he stammered something about their rides together, and their
friendship.

"Oh, you can ride very well," she laughed, "but--"

She did not finish the remark, and the secretary, after a painful
scrutiny of the silent banjo in her lap, went away to the stables and
ordered his horse.  But a man is a fool to ride hard along the bank
of a Brazilian river in the heat of the afternoon.

From one of the windows of his cool room, Hemming watched the
departure of the President's private secretary.  He remembered what
Tetson had said of the boy,--"too young to associate with men."

But youth is a thing easily mended, thought Hemming.
Somehow--perhaps only in size--Hicks recalled O'Rourke to his mind;
and back to him came the days of their good-comradeship.  He wondered
where O'Rourke was now, and what he was busy about.  He had seen him
last in Labrador, where they had spent a month together, salmon
fishing, and up to that time O'Rourke had found no trace of Miss
Hudson.  Ellis's information had proved useless.  Disgusted at the
deception practised upon him, the poor fellow had ceased to speak of
the matter, even with his dearest friend during night-watches by the
camp-fire.




CHAPTER IV.

THE THING THAT HAPPENED

Hicks came along the homeward road at dusk.  Lights were glowing
above the strong walls and behind the straight trunks of the palms.
A mist that one might smell lay along the course of the river.  Hicks
rode heavily and with the air of one utterly oblivious to his
surroundings.  But at the gateway of the officers' mess he looked up.
Captain Santosa was in the garden, a vision of white and gold and
dazzling smile.  He hurried to the gate.

"Ah, my dear Hicks, you are in time for our small cocktails, and then
dinner.  But for this riding so hard, I can call you nothing but a
fool."

"Thanks very much," replied the American, dismounting slowly, "and as
to what you call me, old man, I'm not at all particular."  The
woebegone expression of his plump face was almost ludicrous.

Santosa whistled, and presently an orderly came and took Valentine's
horse.  The two entered the building arm in arm, and the secretary
swayed as he walked.

Five or six of the native officers were already in the mess-room,
swallowing mild swizzles, and talking quietly.  They greeted Hicks
affectionately.

"This man," said Santosa, "had his horse looking like a
shaving-brush, and I know nothing in English so suitable to call him
as this," and he swore vigorously in Portuguese.

"Stow that rot," said Hicks, "can't you see I'm fit as a fiddle; and
for Heaven's sake move some liquor my way, will you?"  His request
was speedily complied with, and he helped himself recklessly from the
big decanter.

The dinner was long and hot, and Valentine Hicks, forgetting utterly
his Harvard manner, dropped his head on the table, between his
claret-glass and coffee-cup, and dreamed beastly dreams.  The swarthy
Brazilians talked and smoked, and sent away the decanters to be
refilled.  The stifling air held the tobacco smoke above the table.
The cotton-clad servants moved on noiseless feet.

"These Americans,--dear heaven," spoke a fat major, softly.

"I am fond of Hicks," said Santosa, laying his hand on the youth's
unconscious shoulder.  A slim lieutenant, who had held a commission
in a Brazilian regiment stationed in Rio, looked at the captain.

"The Americans are harmless," he said.  "They mind their own
business,--or better still, they let us mind it for them.  The
President--bah!  And our dear Valentine.  If he gets enough to eat,
and clothes cut in the English way, and some one to listen to his
little stories of how he used to play golf at Harvard, he is content.
But this Englishman,--this Seor Hemming,--he is quite different."

"Did not you at one time play golf?" asked Santosa, calmly.

"Three times, in Florida," replied the lieutenant, "and with me
played a lady, who talked at her ease and broke two clubs in one
morning.  She was of a fashionable convent named Smith, but this did
not deter her from the free expression of her thoughts."

"Stir up Seor Hicks, that we may hear two fools at the same time,"
said the colonel.

"Take my word for it, colonel, that Valentine is not a fool," said
Santosa, lightly.  "He is very young."

"Have you nothing to say for me?" asked the slim lieutenant,
good-naturedly.

"You know what I think of you all," replied Santosa, without heat.
The conversation was carried on in Portuguese, and now ran into angry
surmises as to the President's reason for placing Hemming in command.

It was close upon midnight when Hicks awoke.  He straightened himself
in his chair and blinked at Santosa, who alone, of the whole mess,
remained at table.

"You have had a little nap," said the Brazilian.

Hicks looked at him for awhile in silence.  Then he got to his feet,
and leaned heavily on the table.

"I'll walk home, old tea-cosey.  Tell your nigger to give my gee
something to eat, will you?"

"You do not look well, my dear Valentine.  You had better stay here
until morning," said Santosa.

Hicks swore, and then begged the other's pardon.

"Am I drunk, old chap?  Do I look that way?" he asked.

Captain Santosa laughed.  "You look like a man with a grudge against
some one," he answered.  "Perhaps you have a touch of fever,
otherwise I know you would have good taste enough to conceal the
grudge.  A gentleman suffers--and smiles."

It was past two o'clock in the morning, and Hemming was lying flat on
his back, smoking a cigarette in the dark.  He had been writing
verses, and letters which he did not intend to mail, until long past
midnight.  And now he lay wide-eyed on his bed, kept awake by the
restless play of his thoughts.

His windows were all open, and he could hear a stirring of wind in
the crests of the taller trees.  His reveries were disturbed by a
stumbling of feet in the room beyond, and suddenly Valentine Hicks
stood in the doorway.  By the faint light Hemming made out the big,
drooping shoulders and the attitude of weariness.  He sat up quickly,
and pushed his feet into slippers.

"That you, Hicks?" he asked.

"Don't talk to me, you damn traitor!" said Hicks.

Hemming frowned, and tossed his cigarette into the night.

"If you will be so good as to turn on the light, I'll get the
quinine," he said.

The secretary laughed.

"Quinine!" he cried; "you fool!  I believe an Englishman would
recommend some blasted medicine to a man in hell."

"You're not there yet," replied Hemming.  He was bending over an open
drawer of his desk, feeling about among papers and bottles for the
box of pills.  Hicks drew something from his pocket and laid it
softly on the table.

"Good morning," he said.  "I intended to kick up a row but I've
changed my mind.  Hand over your pills and I'll go to bed."

When he awoke next day, it was only to a foolish delirium.  The
doctor looked at him, and then at Hemming.

"I suppose you can give it a name," he said.

Hemming nodded.

"I've had it myself," he replied.

The President, followed by his daughter, came into the room.  Hicks
recognized the girl.

"Marion," he said, and when she bent over him, "something has
happened after all."

She looked up at Hemming with a colourless face.  Her eyes were brave
enough, but the pitiful expression of her mouth touched him with a
sudden painful remembrance.  During the hours of daylight the doctor
and Miss Tetson watched by the bedside, moving silently and speaking
in whispers in the darkened room.

The doctor was an Englishman somewhat beyond middle age, with a past
well buried.  In the streets and on the trail his manner was short
almost to rudeness.  He often spoke bitterly and lightly of those
things which most men love and respect.  In the sick-room, be it in
the rich man's villa or in the mud hut of the plantation labourer, he
spoke softly, and his hands were gentle as a woman's.

Hemming had been working with his little army all day, and, after
dining at the mess, he changed and relieved Miss Tetson and the
doctor.  Before leaving the room, the girl turned to him nervously.

"Did you see Valentine last night?" she asked.

Hemming told her that Hicks had come to his room for quinine.

"Good night, and please take good care of him," she said.

The Englishman screwed his eye-glass into place, and glared at her
uneasily.  "Hicks is a good sort," he said, "but he is not the kind
for this country.  Neither are you, Miss Tetson.  But it's nuts for
me,--this playing soldier at another man's expense."

He paused, and she waited, a little impatiently, for him to go on.
"What I wanted to say," he continued, "is that there is one thing
that goes harder with a man than yellow fever.  I--ah--have
experienced both.  Hicks is a decent chap," he concluded, lamely.

Miss Tetson smiled and held out her hand.

"If he should want me in the night, please call me.  I will not be
asleep," she said.

Hemming, for all his rolling, had gathered a good deal of moss in the
shape of handiness and out-of-the-way knowledge.  Twice during the
night he bathed the sick man; with ice and alcohol.  Many times he
lifted the burning head and held water to the hot lips.  Sometimes he
talked to him, very low, of the North and the blue sea, and thus
brought sleep back to the glowing eyes.  The windows were open and
the blinds up, and a white moon walked above the gardens.

Just before dawn, Hemming dozed for a few minutes in his chair.  He
was awakened by some movement, and, opening his eyes, beheld Miss
Tetson at the bedside.  Hicks was sleeping, with his tired face
turned toward the window.  The girl touched his forehead tenderly
with her lips.

Hemming closed his eyes again, and kept them so until he heard her
leave the room,--a few light footsteps and a soft trailing of skirts.
Then, in his turn, he bent above the sleeper.

"If this takes you off, old chap, perhaps it will be better," he said.

But in his inmost soul he did not believe this bitter distrust of
women that his own brain had built up for him out of memory and
weariness.




CHAPTER V.

CHANCE IN PERNAMBUCO

While Hicks tossed about in his fever dreams, and Hemming shook his
command into form, away on the coast, in the city of Pernambuco,
unusual things were shaping.  From the south, coastwise from Bahia,
came Bertram St. Ives O'Rourke.  This was chance, pure and simple,
for he had no idea of Hemming's whereabouts.  From New York, on the
mail-steamer, came a man called Cuddlehead, and took up his abode in
a narrow hotel near the waterfront.  He arrived in the city only an
hour behind O'Rourke.  He was artfully attired in yachting garb, and
had been king-passenger on the boat, where his English accent had
been greatly admired, and his predilection for card-playing had been
bountifully rewarded.  In fact, when he went ashore with his meagre
baggage, he left behind at least one mourning maiden heart and three
empty pockets.

O'Rourke, upon landing, had his box and three leather bags carried
across the square to the ship-chandler's.  He would look about before
engaging a room, and see if the place contained enough local colour
to pay for a stop-over.  He fell, straightway, into easy and polite
conversation with the owner of the store.  From the busy pavement and
dirty square outside arose odours that were not altogether foreign to
his cosmopolitan nose.  Three men greeted one another, and did
business in English and Portuguese, speaking of the cane crop, the
rate of exchange, the price of Newfoundland "fish," and of gales met
with at sea.  Bullock-carts creaked past in the aching sunlight, the
mild-eyed beasts staggering with lowered heads.  Soldiers in
uncomfortable uniforms lounged about.  Cripples exhibited their ugly
misfortunes, and beggars made noisy supplication.

O'Rourke decided that there was enough local colour to keep him, and,
turning from the open door, contemplated the interior of the
establishment.  The place was dim and cool, and at the far back of it
another door stood open, on a narrow cross-street.  Cases of liquor,
tobacco, tea, coffee, and condensed milk were piled high against the
wall.  Baskets of sweet potatoes and hens' eggs stood about.  Upon
shelves behind the counter samples of rope, canvas, and cotton cloth
were exhibited.  Highly coloured posters, advertising Scotch whiskey,
brightened the gloom.  The back part of the shop was furnished with a
bar and two long tables.  At one of the tables sat about a dozen men,
each with a glass before him, and all laughing, talking, swearing,
and yet keeping their eyes attentively fixed on one of their number,
who shook a dice-box.

O'Rourke, who had by this time made his name known to the
ship-chandler, was given a general introduction to the dice-throwers.
He called for a lime-squash, and took a seat at the table between a
dissipated-looking individual whom all addressed by the title of
"Major," and a master-mariner from the North.  There were several of
these shellback skippers at table, and O'Rourke spotted them easily
enough, though, to the uninitiated, they had nothing in common but
their weather-beaten faces.  Their manners were of various degrees,
running from the height of civility around to nothing at all.  There
was the first officer of a Liverpool "tramp" with his elbows on the
board, his gin-and-bitters slopped about, and his voice high in
argument.  Next him sat a mariner from one of the Fundy ports,
nodding and starting, and trying to bury in whiskey remembrance of
his damaged cargo and unseaworthy ship.  Nearer sat a Devonshire man
in the Newfoundland trade, drinking his sweetened claret with all the
graces of a curate, and talking with the polish and conviction of a
retired banker.  O'Rourke glanced up and down the table, and detected
one more sailor--a quiet young man clad in white duck, with "Royal
Naval Reserve" marked upon him for the knowing to see.  These four
men (each one so unlike the other three in clothes, appearance, and
behaviour) all wore the light of wide waters in their eyes, the peace
bred of long night-watches on their tanned brows, and the right to
command on chin and jaw.  O'Rourke felt his heart warm toward them,
for he, too, had kept vigil beside the ghostly mizzen, and read the
compass by the uncertain torch of the lightning.

The other occupants of the table were residents of the country--two
English planters, the major, a commission-merchant, a native cavalry
officer, and several operators of the South American Cable Company.
The major remarked upon the rotten state of the country to O'Rourke,
in a confidential whisper, as he shook the dice in the leather
cylinder.  O'Rourke replied, politely, that he wasn't an authority.

"But I am, sir," blustered the major.  "Dear heaven, man, I'd like to
know who has been American consul in this hole for the last seven
years, only to get chucked out last May by a low plebeian politician."

The speaker's eyes were fierce, though watery, and his face was red
as the sun through smoke.  He drained his glass, and glared at
O'Rourke.

"Couldn't say.  Never was here before," replied O'Rourke.  He counted
his neighbour's throw aloud, for the benefit of the table.

"Three aces, a six, and a five."

He was about to recover two of the dice from a shallow puddle on the
table, and replace them in the box, when he felt a hand on his arm.

"I was American consul," hissed the major, "and, by hell, I'm still
sober enough to count my own dice, and pick 'em up, too."

O'Rourke smiled, unruffled.  "You don't mean you are sober enough,
major--you mean you are not quite too drunk," he said.  The others
paused in their talk, and laughed.  The major opened his eyes a
trifle wider and dropped his under jaw.  He looked the young stranger
up and down.

"Well, I hope you are ashamed of yourself," he said, at last.

"I am sorry I was rude, sir," explained O'Rourke, "but I hate to be
grabbed by the arm that way.  I must have a nerve there that connects
with my temper."

A tipsy smile spread over the ex-consul's face.

"Shake hands, my boy," he cried.  They shook hands.  The others
craned their necks to see.

"You've come just in time to cheer me up, for I've been lonely since
Hemming went into the bush," exclaimed the major.

"Hemming!  Do you mean Herbert Hemming?" asked O'Rourke, eagerly.

"That's who I mean," replied the major, and pushed the dice-box
toward him.  O'Rourke made nothing better than a pair, and had to pay
for thirteen drinks.  If you crave a lime-squash of an afternoon, the
above method is not always the cheapest way of acquiring it.  As the
dice-box went the rounds again, and the attention of the company
returned to generalities, the newcomer asked more particulars of
Hemming's whereabouts.

"He started into the bush more than a week ago, to find some new kind
of adventure and study the interior, he said," explained the major,
"but my own opinion is that he went to see old Tetson in his place up
the Plado.  Sly boy, Hemming!  Whenever we spoke of that crazy
Tetson, and his daughter, and his money, he pretended not to take any
stock in them.  But I'll eat my hat--and it's the only one I have--if
he isn't there at this minute, flashing that precious gig-lamp of his
at the young lady."

O'Rourke had read stories about this eccentric millionaire in the
newspapers some years before.

"Hemming is safe, wherever he lands," he said.  "He's a woman-hater."

A look of half-whimsical disgust flashed across the old man's
perspiring face.  He leaned close to O'Rourke.

"Bah--you make me sick," he cried, "with your silly commonplaces.
Woman-hater--bah--any fool, any schoolboy can say that.  Call a man
an ice-riding pinapede, and you'll display the virtue of originality,
at least.  At first I suspected you of brains."

O'Rourke was embarrassed.  How could he explain that, in using the
term woman-hater, he had meant to suit his conversation to the
intellect of his hearer.  It was commonplace, without doubt, and
meant nothing at all.

"Do you think, Mr. O'Rourke," continued the other, "that simply
because I'm stranded in this hole, on my beam-ends (to use the
language of our worthy table-mates), that my brain is past being
offended?  You are wrong, then, my boy, just as sure as my name is
Farrington.  Hemming would never have called a man a woman-hater.
Why, here am I, sir, sitting as I have sat every day for years,
getting drunk, and with never a word to a woman, white or black, for
about as long as you have used a razor.  But I don't hate women---not
I.  I'd give my life, such as it is, any minute, for the first woman
who would look at me without curling her lip--that is, the first
well-bred white woman.  Ask Hemming what he thinks, and he will tell
you that, in spite of the men, women are still the finest creatures
God ever invented.  No doubt he seems indifferent now, but that's
because he has loved some girl very much, and has been hurt by her."

"You are right, major, and I gladly confess I used a dashed stupid
expression--so now, if you don't mind, please shut up about it,"
replied O'Rourke.  To his surprise Farrington smiled, nodded in a
knowing way, and lapsed into silence.

While one of the mariners was relating a fearsome experience of his
own on a wrecked schooner, Mr. Cuddlehead entered the place and
seated himself at the unoccupied table.  He sipped his peg, and
studied the men at the other table with shifting glances.  He thought
they looked easy, and a vastly satisfied expression came to his
unhealthy, old-young face.  Though well groomed and well clothed, Mr.
Cuddlehead's deportment suggested, however vaguely, a feeling on his
part of personal insecurity.  He glanced apprehensively whenever a
voice was raised high in argument.  He started in his chair when the
man who served the refreshments came unexpectedly to his table to
deposit a match-holder.

To O'Rourke, who had an eye for things beyond the dice, Mr.
Cuddlehead's face hinted at some strange ways of life, and
undesirable traits of character.  In the loose mouth he saw signs of
a once colossal impudence; in the bloated cheeks, dissipation and the
wrecking existence of one who feasts to-day and starves to-morrow; in
the eyes cruelty and cunning; in the chin and forehead a low sort of
courage.

Gradually the crowd at the long table thinned.  First of all the
cavalry officer arose, flicked imaginary dust off the front of his
baggy trousers, and jangled out into the reddening sunlight.  The
planters followed, after hearty farewells.  They had long rides ahead
of them to occupy the cool of the evening, and perhaps would not
leave their isolated bungalows again inside a fortnight.  Next the
operators announced their intentions of deserting the giddy scene.

"Come along, major, you and Joyce promised to feed with us to-night,"
said one of them, "and if your friend there, Mr. O'Rourke, will
overlook the informality of so sudden an invitation," he continued,
"we'll be delighted to have him, too."

"Great heavens, Darlington," exclaimed the major, "you are still as
long-winded as when you first came out," and, before O'Rourke could
accept the invitation for himself, he concluded, "of course O'Rourke
will honour you, my boy."

"Thank you, very much, it's awfully good of you chaps," stammered
O'Rourke, disconcerted by the major's offhand manner.

Darlington smiled reassuringly.  "Don't let this old cock rattle
you," he said, and patted Major Farrington affectionately on the
shoulder.

After dinner that night, in the palatial dining-room of the house
occupied by the staff of the South American Cable Company, O'Rourke
learned something of the major's past life.  It was a sad and
unedifying story.  The major had been trained at West Point, and led
his class in scholarship and drill, and had risen, with more than one
distinction, to the rank of major.  But all the while he had made his
fight against drink, as well as the usual handicaps in the game of
life.  He had married a woman with wealth and position superior to
his own, who had admired him for his soldierly qualities and fine
appearance, and who, later, had been the first to desert him.  Then
followed the foreign consular appointments, the bitter and
ever-increasing debaucheries, and at last the forced retirement from
his country's service.  Now he lived on a small allowance, sent him
weekly, by his family.  O'Rourke began to understand the old man's
fretful and disconcerting moods.

At a late hour the superintendent of the staff ushered O'Rourke to a
big, cool room on the second floor.

"Make this your home," he said, "and we'll let you in on the same
footing as ourselves.  Hemming occupied this room last.  There is his
bed; there is his hammock; and, by Jove, there are his slippers.  You
can have your traps brought up in the morning."

Thus did Bertram St. Ives O'Rourke become an inmate of an imposing
mansion in Pernambuco, with moderate charges to pay and good company
to enliven his hours.




CHAPTER VI.

CUDDLEHEAD DECIDES ON AN ADVENTURE

Toward noon of a stifling day, the major and Mr. Cuddlehead met in
the square by the waterfront.  Cuddlehead greeted the major affably.
As the major was very thirsty he returned the salutation.  A glance
through the door at his elbow displayed, to Mr. Cuddlehead's
uncertain eyes, a number of round tables with chairs about them.  He
took out his watch and examined it.

"Eleven-thirty--I always take something at half-past eleven.  I hope
you will join me," he said.

"I seldom drink before lunch," replied Farrington, "but as this is an
exceptionally dry day--"

They passed through the doorway and sat down at the nearest table.

"Now I will find out what is doing," thought Cuddlehead, and gave his
order.  But for a long time the major's tongue refused to be
loosened.  He sipped his liquor, and watched his companion with eyes
of unfriendly suspicion.  Cuddlehead, in the meantime, exhibited an
excellent temper, put a few casual questions, and chatted about small
things of general interest.

Now Cuddlehead had heard, from the captain of the mail-boat,
something about a wealthy American with a bee in his bonnet and a
pretty daughter, somewhere within reach of Pernambuco.  The story had
grown upon him, and a great idea had taken shape in his scheming
mind.  Why shouldn't he, if all that people said and wrote about
American girls was true?  By gad, he'd make a shot at it.  He'd show
them how to spend their money in more interesting places than the
back of nowhere.  As soon as the major began to look more friendly,
under the influence of the crude whiskey, he produced his
cigar-case,--a fat black leather affair, with an engraved silver
plate on the front of it,--and offered the old man an excellent weed
of Havana.  The major took it, glancing keenly, but swiftly, at the
initials on the case as he did so.  "P. doesn't stand for
Cuddlehead," he thought, but said nothing.

"Tell me something about the man who owns a whole country, somewhere
back here, in the bush," urged Cuddlehead, lightly.  The old man's
muddled wits awoke and jerked a warning.  Here was some scum of
Heaven knows where, wanting to interfere in a better man's business.

"What's that, my boy?" he asked, looking stupidly interested.

"Oh, it is of no importance.  It just struck me as being a bit out of
the way," replied the other.

"What?" inquired the major.

"The place Mr. Tetson hangs out," laughed Cuddlehead.

"It's all that, my boy," replied Farrington, gleefully; then he
stared, open-mouthed.  "At least," he added, "it may be, but what the
hell are you gabbing about?"

"Sorry.  Had no idea it was a secret," retorted the younger man.

The major's potations flooded to his head.  His face took on a darker
shade of crimson.  His hands twitched on the table.

"Secrets!  You d--n little sneak," he roared, staggering up and
overturning his chair.  The expression of insolence faded from
Cuddlehead's face.  He dashed out of the place without paying for the
bottle of whiskey.  On the pavement he paused, long enough to compose
his features and straighten his necktie.  Then he went to the
ship-chandler and gathered a wealth of information concerning Harris
William Tetson.  But he heard no mention of Hemming being in the
country, which was, perhaps, just as well.  He was certainly a sneak,
as more than the major had called him, but he was not altogether a
duffer.  He could look after himself to a certain extent.  He decided
to keep Pernambuco until later, and go now for bigger game.  He made
his plans speedily, fearing another meeting with the major, and early
next morning started along the coast, inside the reef, as a passenger
aboard a native _barcassa_.  The voyage to the mouth of the river
Plado would take the better part of a day.  He would wait in the
little village for Mr. Tetson's steam-launch, which made weekly runs
to the coast for mail and supplies.




CHAPTER VII.

HEMMING LEARNS SOMETHING ABOUT HIS ARMY

In Pernamba, up the Plado, life had taken on a brighter aspect for at
least two of the inhabitants.  Marion Tetson was thankful beyond the
power of speech, because the fever had left Hicks.  True, it had left
him thin and weak as a baby, but his very helplessness made him
dearer in her eyes.  That one who had been so big and strong should
ask her to lift his head whenever he wanted a drink, and should have
his pillow turned for him without displaying a sign of rebellion,
stabbed her to the innermost soul with wonder and pity.  Hicks was
happy because she was near him all day, her eyes telling what her
lips were longing to say, if his dared to question.  Then he could
half remember some things which were as part of his
dreaming--wonderful, magic things with all the glamour of dreams,
free from the weariness of the fever.  But he said nothing of these
just then to Marion, though she read his thoughts like a book while
he lay there very quiet, smiling a little, his gaze following her
every movement.  To Hemming also he wore his heart on his sleeve.  Of
this fact he was blissfully ignorant.  Mrs. Tetson often came to his
room and gave him motherly advice about not talking too much and not
thinking too hard.  Hicks felt no desire to talk, but as for
thinking, Lord, she might as well have told him to stop breathing.
He thought more in ten minutes now than he had before in any three
hours.  They were comforting thoughts, though, for the most part, and
Marion knew that they did him more good than harm.

Hemming kept up a show of interest in the army.  He lectured the
officers and drilled the men, and dined almost every night at the
mess, which he had remodelled on the English plan.  But most of the
time he kept his eye on the President.  It was a job he did not care
about,--this prying into another man's business,--but somehow he
could not put it by him, things were so obviously out of order.  He
kept his monocle polished, his ears open, and his mouth shut.  He was
always willing to listen to the President's dreary conversations.
The life lacked excitement for one who had run the gauntlet of a
hundred vital dangers.  He had given up all special correspondence,
but did a good deal of fiction when the mood was on him.  The longing
to return to a more active existence grew stronger every day, but his
friendship for the Tetsons and for Hicks kept him at his post.

Hemming's morning coffee was always served in his room at six
o'clock.  That left him about two and a half hours of the cool of the
day in which to work.  Breakfast, with its queer dishes of hot meats,
and claret, tea, and coffee to drink, came on about nine.  Breakfast
was a family affair, and after it every one retired for a nap.
Hemming usually drank his coffee before he dressed, but one morning
Smith found him pacing the room, booted and spurred, and attired in
stained breeches and a faded tunic.  There were cigar ashes on the
floor beside the bed.  A volume of Stevenson's "Men and Books" lay
open on the pillow.

"Fill my flask," he said, "and let the President know that I may not
be back until evening."

"Very good, sir," replied the valet.  "Will I order your horse, sir?"

While the man was out of the room Hemming pulled open a drawer in his
desk, in search of revolver cartridges.  The contents of the drawer
were in a shocking jumble.  In his despatch-box at large among his
papers he found half a dozen cartridges, a cigarette from the army
and navy stores at home, and a small bow of black ribbon.  He picked
up the bow, kissed it lightly, and instead of restoring it to the box
put it in his pocket.

"She liked me well enough in those days--or else she did
some--ah--remarkable acting," he said.

Turning on his heel he found Smith in the doorway.

Your horse is ready, sir," said the man.  Hemming blushed, and, to
hide his confusion, told Smith to go to the devil.  He rode away with
an unloaded revolver in his holster.

"It must be a pretty rotten country," soliloquized the valet, "when a
single-eye-glassed, right-about-turn,
warranted-not-to-shrink-wear-or-tear gent like that gets buggy before
breakfast."

The commander-in-chief rode from the gardens by the same gate at
which he had entered for the first time only a month before.  He did
not return the salute of a corporal in the door of the guard-house.
He did not notice the little brown soldier at the gate, who stood at
attention upon his approach, and presented arms as he passed--which
was, perhaps, just as well, for a freshly lighted cigarette smoked on
the ground at the man's feet.  He turned his horse's head northward.
On both sides of the street arose the straight brown boles of the
royal palms, and high above the morning wind sang in the stiff
foliage.  At the end of the street he turned into the path by which
he had first entered the town.  The country folk urged their horses
into the bush that he might pass, and he rode by unheeding.  In their
simple minds they wondered at this, for the fame of his alert
perception and flashing eye-glass had gone far and near.  Of his own
accord the white stallion came to a standstill before a hut.  Hemming
looked up, his reverie broken, and his thoughts returned to Pernamba.

A woman came to the narrow doorway and greeted him with reverence.
He recognized in her the woman who had first welcomed him to the
country.  He dismounted and held out his hand.

"How is the little fellow?" he asked.  At that the tears sprang into
her eyes, and Hemming saw that her face was drawn with sorrow.  He
followed her into the dim interior of the hut.  The boy lay in a
corner, upon an untidy bed, and above him stood the English doctor.
The two men shook hands.

"I can clear him of the fever," said the doctor, "but what for?  It's
easier to die of fever than of starvation."

"Starvation," exclaimed Hemming, "why starvation?"

"The seor does not know," said the woman.  "It is not in his kind
heart to ruin the poor, and bring sorrow to the humble."

"But," said the doctor, looking at Hemming, "to Englishmen of our
class, a nigger is a nigger, say what you please, and the
ends-of-the-earth is a place to make money and London is the place to
spend it."

The soldier's face whitened beneath the tan.

"Don't judge me by your own standards, Scott, simply because you were
born a gentleman," he said.

"Oh," laughed the doctor, "to me money would be of no use, even in
London.  I find the ends-of-the-earth a place to hide my head."

"But what of starvation and ruin?" asked the other.

"I thought," replied the doctor, "that you were in command of the
army.  Ask those mud-faced soldiers of yours why this woman has
nothing to feed to her child."

"I _will_ ask them," said the commander-in-chief, and he ripped out
an oath that did Scott's heart good to hear.  He turned to the woman.

"I am sorry for this," he said, "and will see that all that was taken
from you is safely returned.  The President and I knew nothing about
it."  He drew a wad of notes from his pocket and handed it to her.
Then he looked at the doctor.

"If I did not like you, Scott, and respect you," he continued, "I'd
punch your head for thinking this of me.  But you had both the grace
and courage to tell me what you thought."

"I don't think it now," said Scott, "and I don't want my head
punched, either, for my flesh heals very slowly.  But if I ever feel
in need of a thrashing, old man, I'll call on you.  No doubt it would
be painful, but there'd be no element of disgrace connected with it."

Hemming blushed, for compliments always put him out of the game.  The
woman suddenly stepped closer, and, snatching his hand to her face,
kissed it twice before he could pull it away.  He retreated to the
door, and the doctor laughed.  Safe in the saddle, he called to the
doctor.

"My dear chap," he said, "you have inspired me to a confession.  I,
too, have soured on London."

"Let me advise you to try your luck again.  A girl is sometimes put
in a false light by circumstances---the greed of parents, for
instance," replied Scott.

Hemming stared, unable to conceal his amazement.

"I have not always lived in Pernamba," laughed Scott, "I have dined
more than once at your mess.  Fact is, I was at one time surgeon in
the Sixty-Second."

"You are a dry one, certainly," said Hemming.

"It is unkind of you to remind me of it when the nearest bottle of
soda is at least three miles away, and very likely warm at that,"
retorted the doctor.  Hemming leaned forward in his saddle and
grasped his hand.

"I will not take your advice," he said, "but it was kind of you to
give it.  Forgive me for mentioning it, Scott, but you are a dashed
good sort."

"Man," cried the other, "didn't I tell you that I am hiding my head?"
He slapped the white stallion smartly on the rump, and Hemming went
up the trail at a canter.




CHAPTER VIII.

CAPTAIN SANTOSA VISITS HIS SUPERIOR OFFICER

Hemming got back to the village in time to change and dine with the
family.  The President's mind was otherwhere than at the table.  He
would look about the room, staring at the shadows beyond the
candle-light, as if seeking something.  He pushed the claret past
him, and ordered rye whiskey.  His kind face showed lines unknown to
it a month before.  Mrs. Tetson watched him anxiously.  Marion and
the commander-in-chief talked together like well-tried comrades,
laughing sometimes, but for the most part serious.  Marion was paler
than of old, but none the less beautiful for that.  Her eyes were
brighter, with a light that seemed to burn far back in them, steady
and tender.  Her lips were ever on the verge of smiling.  Hemming
told her all of his interview with the peasant woman, and part of his
interview with Scott.

"There will be trouble soon," he said.

She begged him not to stir it up until Valentine was well enough to
have a finger in it.

"You may not think him very clever," she said, "but even you will
admit that he shoots straight, and has courage."

"I will admit anything in his favour," replied Hemming, "but as for
his shooting, why, thank Heaven, I have never tested it."

"Wasn't he very rude to you one night?" she asked.

He laughed quietly.  "The circumstances warranted it, but he was rude
to the wrong person, don't you think?"

"No, indeed," she cried, "for no matter how minus a quantity your
guilt, or how full of fault I had been, it would never have done for
him to threaten me with a--"  She paused.

"Service revolver?" said Hemming, "and one of my own at that."

"Fever is a terrible thing," she said, gazing at the red heart of the
claret.

"My dear sister," said the Englishman, "a man would gladly suffer
more to win less."

They smiled frankly into one another's eyes.

"Then you do not think too badly of me?" she asked.

"I think everything that is jolly--of both of you," he replied.

"I like your friendship," she said, "for, though you seem such a good
companion, I do not believe you give it lightly."

After the coffee and an aimless talk with Tetson, Hemming looked in
at Hicks and found him drinking chicken broth as if he liked it.  The
invalid was strong enough to manage the spoon himself, but Marion
held the bowl.  Hemming went to his own room, turned on the light
above his desk, and began to write.  He worked steadily until ten
o'clock.  Then he walked up and down the room for awhile, rolling and
smoking cigarettes.  The old ambition had him in its clutches.
Pernamba, with its heat, its dulness, its love and hate, had faded
away.  Now he played a bigger game--a game for the world rather than
for half a battalion of little brown soldiers.  A knock sounded on
his door, and, before he could answer it, Captain Santosa, glorious
in his white and gold, stepped into the room.  The sight of the
Brazilian brought his dreams to the dust.  "Damn," he said, under his
breath.

Then he waved his subordinate to a seat.

The captain's manner was as courteous as ever, his smile as urbane,
his eyes as unfathomable.  But his dusky cheek showed an unusual
pallor, and as he sat down he groaned.  Hemming eyed him sharply; men
like Santosa do not groan unless they are wounded--maybe in their
pride, by a friend's word, maybe in their vitals by an enemy's knife.
There was no sign of blood on the spotless uniform.

"A drink?" queried Hemming, turning toward the bell.

"Not now," said the captain, "but afterward, if you then offer it to
me."  He swallowed hard, looked down at his polished boots, aloft at
the ceiling, and presently at his superior officer's staring
eye-glass.  From this he seemed to gather courage.

"I have disturbed you at your rest, at your private work," he said,
with a motion of the hand toward the untidy desk, "but my need is
great.  I must choose between disloyalty to my brother officers, and
disloyalty to you and the President.  I have chosen, sir, and I now
resign my commission.  I will no longer ride and drink and eat with
robbers and liars.  It is not work for a gentleman."  He paused and
smiled pathetically.  "I will go away.  There is nothing else for my
father's son to do."

"I heard something of this--no longer ago than to-day," said Hemming.

Santosa lit a cigar and puffed for awhile in silence.

"I winked at it too long," he said, at last, "for I was dreaming of
other things.  So that I kept my own hands clean I did not care.
Then you came, and I watched you.  I saw that duty was the great
thing, after all--even for a soldier.  And I saw that even a
gentleman might earn his pay decently."

Hemming smiled, and polished his eye-glass on the lining of his
dinner-jacket.

"Thank you, old chap.  You have a queer way of putting it, but I
catch the idea," he said.

The captain bowed.  "I will go away, but not very far, for I would
like to be near, to help you in any trouble.  Our dear friend
Valentine, whom I love as a brother, is not yet strong.  The
President, whom I honour, is not a fighter, I think.  The ladies
should go to the coast."

"You are right," said Hemming, "but do not leave us for a day or two.
I will consider your resignation.  Now for a drink."

He rang the bell, and then pulled a chair close to Santosa.  When
Smith had gone from the room, leaving the decanter and soda-water
behind him, the two soldiers touched glasses and drank.  They were
silent.  The Brazilian felt better now, and the Englishman was
thinking too hard to talk.  A gust of wind banged the wooden shutters
at the windows.  It was followed by a flash of lightning.  Then came
the rain, pounding and splashing on the roof, and hammering the palms
in the garden.

"That's sudden," said Hemming.

"Things happen suddenly in this country," replied Santosa.

Hemming leaned back and crossed his legs.

"Have you seen Hicks since the fever bowled him?" he asked.

"No," replied the captain, "no, I have not seen him, but he is my
friend and I wish him well.  Is it not through our friends, Hemming,
that we come by our griefs?  It has seemed so to me."

Hemming glanced at him quickly, but said nothing.  Santosa was a
gentleman, and might safely be allowed to make confessions.

"When I first came here," continued the captain, "I was poor, and the
Brazilian army owed me a whole year's back pay.  I had spent much on
clothes and on horses, trying hard to live like my father's son.  Mr.
Tetson offered me better pay, and a gayer uniform.  I was willing to
play at soldiering, for I saw that some gain might be made from it,
outside the pay.  My brother officers saw this also, and we talked of
it often.  Then Miss Tetson came to Pernamba.  I rode out with her to
show her the country.  I told her of my father, and of how, when they
carried him in from the field, they found that the Order of Bolivar
had been driven edgewise through his tunic and into his breast by the
blow of a bullet.  And when I saw the look on her face, my pride
grew, but changed in some way, and it seemed to me that the son of
that man should leave thieving and the crushing of the poor to men of
less distinction.

"Sometimes my heart was bitter within me, and my fingers itched for
the feel of Valentine's throat.  But I hope I was always polite,
Hemming."  He got lightly to his feet, and held out his hand.

"Young ladies talk so in convent-schools," he said.

"Not at all," replied Hemming, gravely, "and I can assure you that
your attitude toward all concerned has left nothing to be desired.  I
will look you up at your quarters after breakfast."

Captain Santosa went through the gardens, humming a Spanish
love-song.  He turned near a fountain and looked up at a lighted
window.  His white uniform gleamed in the scented dusk.  He kissed
his finger-tips to the window.  "The end of that dream," he said,
lightly, and his eyes were as unfathomable as ever.  The water
dripped heavily on to the gold of his uniform.

Hemming went in search of the President, and found him in the
billiard-room, idly knocking the balls about with a rasping cue.

"Have a game, like a good chap," urged the great man.

The commander-in-chief shook his head.

"Not now, sir.  I came to tell you something about the army," he
replied.  He was shocked at Tetson's sudden pallor.  The yellow cigar
was dropped from nerveless fingers and smeared a white trail of ash
across the green cloth.

"What do they want?" asked Tetson, in a husky voice.

"Oh, they take whatever they want," replied Hemming; "the taxes that
are due you, and something besides from the unprotected."  Then he
retailed the case of the poor woman.  When he had finished Tetson did
not speak immediately.  His benevolent face wore an expression that
cut Hemming to the heart.

"I must think it over," he said, wearily, "I must think it over."




CHAPTER IX.

MR. CUDDLEHEAD ARRIVES

Mr. Cuddlehead's trip, though free from serious accident, had been
extremely trying.  The _barcassa_ had cramped his legs, and the smell
of the native cooking, in so confined a space, had unsettled his
stomach.  He had been compelled to wait three days in the
uninteresting village at the mouth of the Plado, unable to hurry the
leisurely crew of the launch.  But at last the undesirable journey
came to an end, and with a sigh of relief he issued from beneath the
smoke-begrimed awning, and stretched his legs on the little wharf at
Pernamba.  He looked at the deserted warehouses along the
river-front, and a foreboding of disaster chilled him.  The afternoon
lay close and bright in the unhealthy valley, and the very
peacefulness of the scene awoke a phantom of fear in his heart.  What
if the President were a man of the world after all, with a knowledge
of men and the signs on their faces?  Why, then, good-bye to all hope
of the family circle.

A black boy accosted Cuddlehead, awaking him from his depressing
surmises.  The nigger gabbled in the language of the country.  Then
he pointed at the traveller's bag.

"Take it, by all means," said Cuddlehead.

There is one hostelry in Pernamba, on a side street behind the
military stables.  It is small and not very clean.  To this place the
boy led Cuddlehead, and at the door demanded five hundred reis--the
equivalent of sixpence.  Cuddlehead doubled the sum, for after all he
had done very well of late, and a favourable impression is a good
thing to make in a new stamping-ground, even on a nigger.  The
proprietor of the inn bowed him to the only habitable guest-chamber.
Here he bathed, as well as he could with two small jugs of water and
his shaving-soap, and then changed into a suit of clean white linen.
With a cigarette between his lips and a light rattan in his hand,
Cuddlehead was himself again.  He swaggered into the narrow street
and started in search of the President's villa.  He passed a group of
soldiers puffing their cigarettes in a doorway, who stared after him
with interest and some misgivings.  "Was the place to be invaded by
Englishmen?" they wondered.  He saw a brown girl of attractive
appearance, rolling cigars beside an open window.  He entered the
humble habitation, and, after examining the samples of leaf, in sign
language ordered a hundred cigars.  Then he embraced the girl, and
was promptly slapped across the face and pushed out of the shop.

"What airs these d--n niggers put on," he muttered, "but maybe I was
a bit indiscreet."

Here, already, was the hand of Hemming against him, though he did not
know it; for Hemming, also, had bought cigars from the girl, and had
treated her as he treated all women, thereby establishing her
self-respect above the attentions of men with eyes like Cuddlehead's.

Cuddlehead found the gates open to the President's grounds without
much trouble, and was halted by the sentry.  He produced his
card-case.  The sentry whistled.  The corporal issued from the
guard-house, with his tunic open and his belt dangling.

Just then Captain Santosa entered from the street, with, in the
metaphorical phrase of a certain whist-playing poet, "a smile on his
face, and a club in his hand."  He swore at the corporal, who
retreated to the guard-house, fumbling at his buttons.  He bowed to
Cuddlehead, and glanced at the card.

"You would like to see the President?" he said.  "Then I will escort
you to the door."  He caught up his sword and hooked it short to his
belt, wheeled like a drill-sergeant, and fitted his stride to
Cuddlehead's.

Mr. Tetson received the visitor in his airy office.  He seemed
disturbed in mind, wondering, perhaps, if this were a dun from some
wholesale establishment on the coast.  He had been working on his
books all the morning, and had caught a glimpse of ruin, like a great
shadow, across the tidy pages.  But he managed to welcome Cuddlehead
heartily enough.

"You must stay to dinner, sir,--pot-luck,--very informal, you know,"
he said, hospitably.  He leaned against the desk and passed his hand
across his forehead.  He could not keep his mind from working back to
the sheets of ruled paper.

"Ten thousand," he pondered, "ten thousand for April alone, and
nothing to put against it.  The army wanting its pay, and robbing me
of all I have.  Gregory's coal bill as long as my leg.  Sugar gone to
the devil!"  He sighed, mopped his face, and looked at Cuddlehead,
who all the while had been observing him with furtive, inquiring
eyes.  He offered a yellow cigar, and lit one himself.

"Excuse me a moment," he said.  "I have something to see to.  Here
are some English papers.  I'll be back immediately, Mr. Cuddlehead,
and then maybe we can have a game of billiards."

He went hurriedly from the room.

"You are a foolish old party," remarked Cuddlehead to the closed
door, "and, no doubt, you'll be all the easier for that.  Hope your
daughter is a better looker, that's all."

He tossed the offensive cigar into the garden, and seated himself in
the chair by the desk.  His courage was growing.

At the hall door Mr. Tetson met Hemming entering.  The commander was
booted and spurred.

"Are you busy?" inquired the President.  "There's a visitor in here."

The Englishman glared.

"Yes, sir, I am busy," he replied.  "I've caught my command in seven
of their thieving tricks, and have ridden thirty miles to do it.
I've told the whole regiment what I think of them, and now I must
dine at the mess, to see that they don't concoct any schemes to
murder me."

"Haven't you time for a game of billiards with Mr. Cuddlehead?" asked
Mr. Tetson.

"No, sir, I have not," replied Hemming, crisply, and tramped away to
change his clothes.  "The old ass," he muttered, under his breath.

Dinner that night was a dull affair.  Hemming and Hicks were both
absent from the table.  Cuddlehead had excellent manners, and all the
outward signs of social grace, but a warning was marked on his face.
The President tried to be entertaining, but the terror of an
impending disturbance, and even of ruin, hung over him.  Mrs. Tetson,
guessing somewhat of her husband's troubles, sat pale and fearful.
Marion was polite, with a politeness that, after two or three essays
of gallantry on Cuddlehead's part, left him inwardly squirming.
After dinner Miss Tetson described the visitor to Hicks, mentioning
the horrible mouth, the shifting eyes, and the odious attentions.

"He must be pretty bad, for you to talk about him," said Valentine,
in wonder.

"Oh, if I had never seen men like you and Mr. Hemming," she answered,
"he would not seem so utterly ridiculous."

Hicks was in a chair by the window, and Marion was perched on the arm
of it.  His eyes were desperate.  Hers were bright and daring.  Her
mouth was tremulous.

"I can understand your admiration for Hemming," he said.  "He is the
best chap on earth, barring only you."

Marion smiled.

"I wonder," he continued, presently, "I wonder if--that was all a
dream?"

"What?" she asked.

"I wish I could see you," he said.  "I believe you are laughing at me
up there."

"I am laughing," she replied, "but I don't know why exactly."

"At my stupidity, perhaps."

"You are certainly very stupid."

"No, I'm a coward."

"What are you afraid of?"

He leaned back as far as he could, trying to see her face.

"I am afraid you pity me--and don't love me," he said.

He breathed hard after that, as if he had run a mile.

"I am not modest enough to pity you," she said, softly, "though no
doubt you are deserving of pity."

"Marion," he whispered, "for God's sake, don't.  I'm too blind with
anxiety to read riddles.  Tell me straight--do you love me?  Have I
even the ghost of a chance?"

"Do you believe in ghosts?" asked she, with trembling laughter, and,
bending forward, with a hand on either of his thin shoulders, she
pressed her cheek to his.

While love had his innings in the sick-room, below curiosity led the
feet of Mr. Cuddlehead toward the officers' quarters on the outskirts
of the town.  The night was fine, and not oppressively close.  A
breeze from the hills made liquid stir in the higher foliage.
Cuddlehead felt in his blood a hint of something unusual, as he took
his way through the President's wide gardens, and out to the road.
No sentinel paced, sabre at shoulder, before the little guard-house.
The troopers stood in groups along the street, smoking and talking.
The smoke of their pungent cigarettes drifted on the air, and the
murmur of their voices rang with a low note of menace.  Unmolested,
Cuddlehead reached the long white building where the officers of this
inconsiderable army lodged and messed.  Through the open windows
glowed a subdued light from the shaded lamps above the table.  The
compassing verandas were but partially illuminated by the glow from
within, and silent men stood here and there in the shadows,
motionless and expectant.  At Cuddlehead's approach, the nearer ones
hesitated for a moment, and then drew away.

"There is something rotten," quoted Cuddlehead, under his breath, and
looked cautiously in.  For a moment the array of faultless, gaudy
mess-jackets startled him.  In the sight of an apparently civilized
military mess there was, to him, a suggestion of danger.  Recovering
his composure, he looked again.  The faces up and down the table were
dark, and, for the most part, sullen.  At the head of the board, with
his face toward the onlooker's place of vantage, sat Hemming.  His
shoulders were squared.  His eye-glass gleamed in the lamplight.
Cuddlehead stared at the commander-in-chief with a fearful,
spellbound gaze.  His hands clutched at the low window-sill.  His
breath seemed to hang in his windpipe.  At last he straightened
himself, moistened his craven lips with his tongue, and went
stealthily away.  Safe in his own room in the quiet inn, he took a
shrewd nip of raw brandy.

"What the devil," he asked himself, "brought that righteous,
immaculate fool to this God-forsaken place?"

Two things were uppermost in his memory--a caning once given to a
cad, and a shilling once tossed to a beggar.




CHAPTER X.

THE FIRST SHOT

Mr. Cuddlehead did not go far afield during the day following his
glimpse of the officers' dinner-table.  Instead, he kept to his room
until evening, or at most took a furtive turn or two on the cobbles
before the inn door.  After his lonely and not very palatable dinner
was over, he set out cautiously for the President's villa.  He wanted
to have a talk with Miss Tetson alone.  She, no doubt, could explain
matters to him, so that he might be able to decide on a course of
action.  He walked slowly, keeping always a vigilant look-out for the
trim, dauntless figure of Herbert Hemming.  At the great gateway the
brown boy on sentry-go saluted, and let him pass without question.
In return he treated the fellow to his blandest smile and a _milreis_
note.  He did not keep long to the drive, but turned off into a
narrow path as soon as he felt that the soldier had ceased watching
him.  He took his time, traversing winding paths between low tropical
shrubs and yellow-stemmed bamboo, but always drawing nearer to the
quiet mansion.  Presently his ear caught a welcome sound,--the soft,
frivolous strumming of a banjo.  He was aware that Hemming was not
musical; in fact, he remembered that his rendering of "Father
O'Flynn" had once been mistaken for the national anthem.

Cuddlehead found Miss Tetson on a stone seat, near her favourite
fountain.  At sight of him, she stopped her idle playing, and
answered his salutation with the coldest of bows.  Her lover's kisses
still burned on her lips, and words of his impulsive wooing still
rang sweetly in her ears.  Even the little brown crane, that stood
there watching the sparkling water with eyes like yellow jewels,
reminded her of a certain evening when she had been unkind to
Valentine Hicks.  The hour was not for Cuddlehead.

Undisturbed by the coolness of his reception, Mr. Cuddlehead seated
himself at the far end of the bench, and began to talk.  He described
his journey from Pernambuco to Pernamba, and with so fine a wit that
Marion smiled.  He told little anecdotes of his past, very clever,
and very vague as to dates and scenes.  The girl almost forgot the
sinister aspect of his face in the charm of his conversation, and
when he mentioned Hemming, in terms of warmest respect, she confided
to him something of his trouble with the army.

"Perhaps I can be of some use; one Englishman should be good for ten
of those niggers," he said.  He lifted the banjo from the seat, and
made it dance and sing through the newest Southern melody.  His touch
was both dainty and brilliant.  He replaced the instrument on the
seat between them.  He saw that the girl was more favourably
impressed with him than she had been.  For a little while they kept
silence, and her thoughts returned to Valentine Hicks.  Suddenly they
heard Hemming's voice, pitched low and sharp, in anger.  He was
hidden from them by shrubs of tangled growth.

"I have given my orders," he said.  "Do you understand?"

The thick voice of the colonel made reply in spluttering oaths.

"No more of that," said Hemming, fiercely.

Marion heard the crunch of his heels on the path as he wheeled.
Cuddlehead held his breath, the better to hear, and a quotation about
a house divided against itself came imperfectly to his mind.

The heavy footsteps of the native officer were heard retreating.
Presently Hemming rounded the hedge of roses, and stood by the
fountain.  By the faint starlight the watchers saw that he was
smiling.  He lit a cigarette with deliberate care, and dropped the
match into the shallow basin of the fountain.  He lit another match
and looked at his watch.  He had the air of one keeping a tryst.
Santosa came out of the shadows beyond, booted and spurred.  The two
men shook hands, and whispered together.  Their backs were turned
square upon the occupants of the bench.  Then Hemming produced a long
packet of papers and gave them to Santosa.

"Mr. Tetson has signed them all," he said, "and the major will see to
the business part of it.  Impress the importance of the matter upon
him, and then hurry back, for I'm afraid these idiots intend making
this unpleasant for us.  And now, old man, good luck and God bless
you.  It is a fine night for a ride."

"A beautiful night," replied Santosa, "and on such a night I must
either make love to my friends or trouble for my enemies."

He turned on his heel and clanked away.

All this time Marion had sat as one spellbound.  Now she looked
toward the other end of the stone seat.  Cuddlehead had gone.  She
called to Hemming.  He started at the sound of her voice.  "You
here?" he said.

"Yes, and so was Mr. Cuddlehead a moment ago.  But he sneaked off,
the little cad."

"Did he see the papers?" he asked.

"Yes, I'm sure he did," she replied.

"You had better run into the house," he said.  "I'll look for the
spy."

Marion hastened indoors, and told Hicks all she knew about the
trouble.  The young man looked deeply concerned.

"I wish Hemming had come to us a year ago," he exclaimed.

"Could he have helped it?" she asked.

"I believe he would have opened our eyes, dear, before things got
into such an awful mess," replied her lover.

"But surely we are not in any danger," she urged.  "Surely Mr.
Hemming and father can quiet them."

"Our lives are safe enough, but the little fools may break some
windows.  You see, dear, the President and I have not watched them as
we should.  We have let them rob us right and left, and now, when
Hemming tries to spoil their game, and force them to divvy up, they
evidently want to bully us.  It's in their blood, you know,--this
revolution business."  Having thus unbosomed himself, Hicks leaned
weakly back in his chair.

"Dearest," he said, presently, "will you bring me my Winchester--it's
in the boot closet--and that bag of cartridges on my writing-table."

The girl brought them, and Hicks oiled the breech of the rifle.

A few minutes later the President and Mrs. Tetson entered the
secretary's sitting-room.  They found that gentleman sorting out
heaps of cartridges, while their daughter sat near him busily
scrubbing sections of a Colt's revolver with a toothbrush.  The
President's face displayed shame and consternation.

"God help us! we are ruined," he said, looking from one to another
with bloodshot eyes.

He produced a yellow cigar from a shabby case, and seated himself
close to the window.  Suddenly he stood up and looked out.

"Who's that?" he asked.

"Hemming," came the faint reply.

A rifle cracked, and the bullet splintered the slats of the shutter.
The President retired into the room and turned off the lights.

"Hemming was right.  They mean to force me," he exclaimed.

Hicks tottered to the window, rifle in hand.  The sounds of a violent
scuffle arose from the flowerbeds.  Hicks could just make out a
rolling, twisting mass below.

"Hold your fire," gasped a voice which he recognized as Hemming's.
Presently the mass ceased its uneasy movements, and divided itself
into two equal parts, one of which continued to lie among the crushed
flowers, while the other staggered along the wall of the house and
entered the dining-room by a window.  The President, carrying a
revolver awkwardly, hurried down-stairs.  Presently he returned, he
and Smith leading Hemming between them.  Hemming was limp, and his
pale face was streaked with dust and sweat.  Blood dripped from his
left sleeve.  His monocle was gone.

"Mrs. Tetson, if you'll tie up my arm,--I'll show you how,--I'll be
fit as a fiddle," he said, and sank into a chair.

"Gun?" queried Hicks, who knelt by the window, with his rifle on the
sill.

"Knife," replied Hemming.

Marion cut away the sleeve of his jacket.  "Surely Mr. Cuddlehead did
not carry a knife," she said.

"I don't think so; I jumped on the wrong man.  Heard some one
crawling through the bushes, and thought I had him.  One of my own
troopers--he stuck me in the muscles,--bleeds a bit, that's all," he
replied.

"There's not a sound in the garden now," said Hicks.

"Who fired the shot?" asked Tetson.

"A corporal," said Hemming.  "He was behind me when you spoke.  I
didn't know--any one--was near.  He'll never--fire another--shot."
Then the commander-in-chief fainted on Valentine's bed, and Smith
brought him around with cold water and brandy.  Then Smith stole away
from the villa toward the barracks.  It was close upon dawn when he
returned.

"They think they'll kidnap the President and the ladies, and take
them away up-country and hold them for a ransom; it is the stranger's
idea," he informed them.

The President turned a shade paler, and glanced apprehensively at his
wife and daughter.  Hicks swore.  Hemming sat up and slid his feet to
the floor.

"They are fools,--and Cuddlehead must be mad," he exclaimed.  Tetson
went over to his wife.

"Can you forgive me, dear?" he asked, huskily.  For answer she kissed
him.

The villa was left undisturbed all the following day.  Again darkness
came.  The gardens were deserted.  Smith had crawled around the house
four times without hearing a sound or attracting a shot.  The
troopers were crowded together on and about the verandas of the
officers' quarters, listening to the heated discussions of their
superiors, Cuddlehead was with the officers, he and the colonel
pouring their whiskey from the same decanter.  A dark and silent
procession moved from the President's villa down to the river, where
the little steamer lay with her boilers hot.  Mr. Tetson carried a
small bag filled with sovereigns and a basket of food.  Marion and
Mrs. Tetson and two maids followed with wraps, baskets, and firearms.
Smith scouted ahead.  Hemming and Hicks walked feebly behind, armed
and alert.  The things were passed smartly aboard.  The mooring-line
was cleared.  Hicks steadied himself by Marion's arm.

"We will soon follow you," he said.  "Then you will think better of
me than if I went now."

They were very close together, and the others were all busy crawling
under the dirty awnings, or saying good-bye.

"I am poor as Job's turkey," he said.

"And my father is ruined," she replied.

"When will you marry me?" he asked.

"As soon as you come for me,--in Pernambuco, or New York,
or--anywhere," she answered.  Then she kissed him, and at the touch
of her tear-wet face his heart leaped as if it would leave its place
in his side to follow her.

The little steamer swung into the current, and drifted awhile without
sound.  Presently a red crown of sparks sprang from the stack, and
like a thing alive it darted away down the sullen stream.  Hemming,
Hicks, and Smith turned silently and stole back to the deserted
house.  During their short absence, all the native servants had run
away.

Smith, who seemed devoid of fear, buried the dead trooper in the
flower-bed upon which he had fallen.  Doctor Scott joined the
garrison toward morning, and was both relieved and surprised to find
that the Tetsons had decamped safely.

"They are not dangerous now, except to property," he said.  "They may
do a little accidental shooting, of course, for the colonel is very
drunk, and down on you, Hemming, for spoiling his profitable game.
That new chap seems to be quite off his head.  Never heard such fool
talk in all my life as he is spouting."

"Did Santosa get away?" asked Hemming.

"Two men went after him, and only one came back, and he is in the
hospital," replied the doctor.

"Who looked after him?" inquired Hemming.

"I stitched him up before I came away," replied Scott, casually.




CHAPTER XI.

THE COLONEL'S ULTIMATUM

The little garrison breakfasted before sunrise.  They had been busily
occupied all night, securing doors and windows against any sudden
attack.  Smith made the secretary a huge bowl of beef tea, much to
that warlike invalid's disgust.

"See here, Smith," he said, "if I can fight, I can eat."

"Miss Tetson's orders, sir," replied the man, gravely.

The doctor laughed boisterously, and Hicks blushed.  While Hemming
and Scott devoured boiled eggs, muffins; and coffee, with Smith
waiting on them with a revolver in his pocket, Hicks retired to
another room, out of sight of temptation.  The poor fellow felt that
seven eggs and a plate of muffins would be as nothing in his huge
emptiness.  He opened one of the upper front windows, and knelt by
the sill, rifle in hand.  His thoughts were gloomy.  The beef tea had
only sharpened his appetite and dampened his spirits.  Outside, the
dawn was quickly strengthening, filling the beautiful gardens with
magic, inviting light.  He thought of the little fountain in front of
the bench, and of the lonely crane.  Suddenly he heard the brisk
padding of hoofs on the drive, and the colonel, followed by a
trooper, rode up to the great steps.

With pardonable caution, Hicks protruded his head from the window,
and addressed the Brazilian politely.

The stout horseman saluted, and spoke thus, in what he fondly
considered to be English: "Seor, a good morning to you, my friend.
I here have a letter, humbly which I wish a delivery in the hands of
General Hemming."

He smiled up at the man in the window, evidently vastly pleased with
his speech.  It was not often that he attempted the language of these
aliens.

"If you will kindly request the gentleman with you to poke the letter
under the door, I shall be delighted to deliver it to the general,"
replied Hicks, with a wan grin.

The colonel blinked sleepily, for he had been up late, assisting at
the writing of the letter, and emptying bottles.  "Have no tremble,
seor," he said, "for see,--I am as a sheep, mild."

"I know nothing of sheep, colonel," replied Hicks, "and all is not
wool that looks greasy."  The soldiers below looked puzzled, and
Hicks felt sorry that they were his only audience.  Presently the
colonel spoke to his man in Portuguese, and passed him a long, white
envelope.  The little trooper advanced upon the doorway.

"Thank you, sir," cried Hicks, and bowed, as he turned from the
window.  But the colonel called him back.

"A moment, seor," he said; "I will inquire of the conditions of the
ladies, with most respectable regards."

"Thank you, they are very well," said Hicks, and hurried away.

When Hicks gave the letter to Hemming, that self-possessed gentleman
and the doctor were smoking, with their chairs pushed back, and Smith
was eating muffins with surprising rapidity.

"A letter to you?" queried Scott.  "Then they must know of Tetson's
escape."

"Possibly," said Hemming, and opened the paper.  At first he smiled,
as he read.  Then, of a sudden, he wrinkled his brows, stared, and
looked up.

"What is that stranger's name?" he asked, sharply.

"Cuddlehead, sir," replied Smith, promptly.

"I doubt it," retorted the other, "for I have reason enough to
remember this handwriting."

To explain the remark, he opened the sheet on the table, and pointed
to where a line had been crossed through and rewritten in a
chirography very different to that of the body of the manuscript.

"He seemed harmless enough, whoever he is, from what I heard of him,"
remarked Hicks.

"He's a sneaking cad," said Hemming, hotly, "and has more devil in
him than you could find in the whole of that rotten battalion put
together.  His real name is Penthouse,--and, by gad, no wonder he
kept out of my sight!"

"May we read the letter?" asked the doctor, calmly.

"Read away," said the commander-in-chief, and got out of his chair to
pace the room.

The style of the document disclosed its mongrel extraction.  It ran
as follows:


"TO THE DISTINGUISHED SEOR HERBERT HEMMING, LATE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF
OF THE ARMY OF PERNAMBA.

"DEAR SIR:--We, the undersigned officers of the Army of Pernamba
(seeing in you the real head of the presidential household), do
hereby request you to consider the following petitions.  First--We
desire the sum of ten thousand dollars, due us and our men, in back
pay, as per signed agreement with Mr. Tetson.  Second--We desire an
apology from your distinguished and august self, due us for insulting
words spoken to every officer and man of this army.  Should the above
petitions not be granted within twenty-four hours, we shall proceed,
without further parley, to force the money from Mr. Tetson and the
apology from you."


At the foot of this ridiculous but disconcerting epistle, stood the
names of all the native officers, except, of course, Captain Santosa.

The morning passed without disturbance.  The brown soldiers moved
about the fast-shut house, smoking endlessly, and talking to one
another.  The afternoon proved as unexciting as the morning, and
Smith began to long for a fight.  But Hemming would not let him even
take pot-shots at the men in the grounds.  By the doctor's orders,
the secretary's diet was advanced to soft-boiled eggs.  By good luck
a store of these were in the house, all more or less fresh.

The colonel took up his position before the villa bright and early on
the morning of the 20th of May.  It was quite evident to Hemming, who
watched him from an upper window, that he had been drinking heavily.
Hemming was the first to speak.

"What do you want?" he asked.

"I am sure you know what I want, seor," he replied, in his own
language.

"Mr. Tetson and I have decided not to consider your so-called
petitions," said Hemming, quietly.  "We would prove ourselves cowards
should we do so.  Mr. Tetson owes you nothing,--in fact, the debt is
very much the other way; and I shall never ask your pardon for having
spoken the truth."

The colonel was furious.

"Consider the safety of the ladies," he shouted.

Scott, who stood behind Hemming, chuckled at that.  "What wily,
open-eyed chaps they are," he said.  "I wonder if they have missed
the steamer yet?"

Hemming leaned from the window.  "We can look after the ladies, thank
you," he sneered, "and, by the way, tell your precious English
friend, who helped you write that charming letter, that if I get my
hands on him, he'll suffer more than he did the other time.  Hurry
along now."

Hemming had recovered his monocle, and before its baleful glare the
colonel was silent and confused.  Just then Cuddlehead thumped into
view, clinging to the neck of Hemming's own white stallion.  He was
in a far worse state than the colonel even, and swayed in the saddle.

"Good morning, Captain Hemming," he cried, and waved his hand.

The men in the room were startled by the expression that crossed
their friend's face.  The mouth hardened.  The eyes narrowed.  A deep
flush burned in his thin cheeks.  He paid no heed to the stranger's
salutation.

"Pepper," he said, softly.

The stallion looked up.

"What is that pitiful object on your neck?  That nasty cad?"

Pepper hung his clever little head.

His master leaned far out of the window, and his eyes met those of
the little stallion.

"Pepper," he said, "jump."

Pepper jumped.  Cuddlehead slid over his tail, and for a full minute
remained seated in the dust.  The Brazilian colonel reeled in his
saddle with choking laughter.

"Good old horse, good Pepper," called Hemming, gently.

The stallion cantered away, riderless.

The object of the colonel's uncomfortable mirth got painfully to his
feet.  His face was purple with the fury that raged within him.  He
cast discretion to the winds, and, drawing a revolver, emptied it at
the smoking-room window.  He looked under the cloud of dirty smoke,
and saw Hemming's face bent toward him, set and horrible.

"Go away," said a voice that rang like metal, "or I will kill you
where you stand.  You have crossed my trail once too often,
Penthouse, and, by God! this will be the last time.  But now you may
go away, you poor fool."

Scott twitched once or twice, where he lay on the smoking-room floor,
with his head on Smith's knee.

But he was dead, sure enough, with a hole in his neck and another in
his heart.

News of the doctor's death soon reached the army, and the colonel's
eyes were partially opened to his foolishness.  He returned to his
quarters, and tried to drown his misgivings in drink.  Soon he was as
reckless and crazy as ever.  It was not a game for a sober man to
play with any chance of success.  Penthouse, for it was really he,
cursed his luck when he heard of his deed, but not so much in disgust
at having killed a harmless stranger as in having missed Hemming.
Then he steadied his nerves with a glass of brandy, and encouraged
the army to fresh efforts.

In the afternoon, Hemming opened the front door, and stared at the
men on the veranda.  His left arm was in a sling.  The troopers
straightened up at sight of him, and one even went so far as to toss
away his cigarette.  The slim lieutenant, with the weakness for golf,
bowed low.

"While you are waiting for that money," said Hemming, "will you be
kind enough to ask some of your men to dig a grave over there?"  He
pointed with his hand.  The lieutenant gave the order.  Then he
turned to Hemming.

"We regret the doctor's death," he said, "but,--ah--well--the
fortunes of war."

"You give this lawlessness rather a dignified name," replied the
Englishman.

A blush was all the Brazilian's answer.

"Do you want to kill us all, or is it only the money you are after?"
asked Hemming.

The lieutenant looked both ashamed and sulky.  He was handsome in a
weak sort of way, with a baby face and a thread of black moustache.
"We want not to kill," he began, in stilted English, then in his own
tongue he continued, "We swore long ago to stick together and hold to
our plans,--all except Captain Santosa.  We are poor, and one way of
making money seemed as good as another.  We have our pride and our
honour,--we officers.  You insulted our colonel.  You have called us
robbers.  Now we will humble your arrogance,--and get our pay."

Hemming translated slowly, often having to hark back to a word and
feel around for its meaning.  The troopers, who had caught something
of the conversation, awaited the commander-in-chief's reply in
expectant attitudes.

"You have your pride," he said at last; "then, for God's sake, take
it away!  It reminds me of a cur with a rotten bone.  And that
murderer you have with you, surely you are proud of him.  Humble my
arrogance if you can.  It will stand a lot of that sort of thing."

He looked out to where three men were breaking the sod for Scott's
grave.

"How many of you has Doctor Scott nursed back to worthless lives?" he
asked.  The men turned their faces toward the gravediggers.




CHAPTER XII.

O'ROURKE TO THE RESCUE

Penthouse (still known to the army as Seor Cuddlehead) sat in the
colonel's bedroom in an unenviable frame of mind.  He had been a fool
to show himself to Hemming.  He had been a fool to put any faith in
these niggers.  Why, the little cowards were afraid to break into the
house,--afraid to face five white men and a couple of women.  And now
that Hemming had seen him again, and again in a decidedly
unfavourable light, what mercy could he expect if Hemming ever got
out of the President's villa?  Whatever he could do must be done
quickly.  He looked at the colonel, who lay in drunken half-slumber
on the bed.

"You don't seem to be carrying out our plans," he said.

The Brazilian groaned, and muttered something in his own tongue,
which, fortunately, the other could not translate.  "We must carry
off the women to-night.  Our chances of getting what we want lessen
every hour.  If help comes from the coast, then what will happen?
Half a dozen men could run your dirty army out of the country."  With
every unheeded word, Penthouse's anger grew.  The colonel sprawled
there, murmuring that he felt very ill.  Penthouse jumped up and
shook him violently.

"Wake up, you drunken hog!" he shouted; "wake up, and get to work."

The colonel opened his eyes.

"The ladies--they are gone.  They went--long ago."

He closed his eyes again.

"You fool!" cried Penthouse, trembling with rage and disappointment,
"you fool, didn't I tell you to put a guard on the boat, and to
surround the house?"

"The guard went--to Pedro's--to buy wine.  I did not hear till
to-day.  I was angry," replied the Brazilian, in a faint and broken
voice.

"To buy wine," echoed the white man, in a tragic cry.  Failure
grinned at him again.  Even in battle and murder he could not
succeed.  He almost found it in him to regret the vagrant, hungry
days on the London streets, when he went up and down among familiar
faces, tattered and disguised.  He was at home there, at least, and
knew the tricks of the place.  But here, hunted by Hemming for a
murderer, penniless, and among strangers,--Lord, one would be better
dead.

"Hemming must never get away from that house," he whispered to
himself.

The colonel snorted and choked in his heavy sleep.  For a few minutes
the broken Englishman looked at him intently.  Then he walked over to
a small table by the window.  "There is still liquor that I don't
have to pay for," he said, and lifted the bottle.

Through the President's gardens and the streets of the little town,
the troopers sauntered and smoked, awaiting further orders from their
colonel for the undoing of the passive enemy.

"The colonel and Seor Cuddlehead are closeted together," said a
subaltern to a sergeant, "so before dark we shall have our money."

"But the ladies have gone," replied the sergeant.  "They went away in
the President's steamer while the guard was shaking dice at Pedro's."

"How do you know that?" argued the officer.  "No one saw them go.  Of
course they keep away from the windows."

"The General Hemming would see that we got our money, if the ladies
were in any danger," said the other, conclusively.  But the subaltern
shook his head.

"You don't know these fools of Englishmen as well as I do," he said.
"They would rather have their own grandmothers shot than pay out any
money."

"But," retorted the sergeant, with a knowing look, "it is not the
general's money we want, but the President's.  He would force the old
man to pay, if the ladies were in peril.  No, the women have gone
with the steamer, I am sure."

"Englishmen are stubborn brutes," replied the officer, unconvinced,
"and besides, my friend, this Hemming believes that with his own
right arm he is able to defend the house against us.  Also, my
friend, why should he give us Tetson's money until we force him to?
It may all be his some day."

The besieged wondered why more shooting was not done.  What fun could
the little men find in a smokeless revolution?  Did they still cling
to the hope of receiving back pay?  Did they still believe the family
to be in the villa?  Hemming, seated by the window, with his rifle
across his knees, wondered when they would begin to humble his
arrogance.  Valentine Hicks, eating quinine and prowling from room to
room, and window to window, with his Winchester under his arm, lived
over and over again his parting with Marion.  Smith, armed like a
pirate, and itching for a fight, was happier than he had ever been.
He had a heavy strain of the bulldog in him, had this valet named
Smith, also a fine respect for gentlemen, and a love of their
companionship.

It was dark in the gardens.  Smith was downstairs in the
billiard-room, motionless and wide awake.  Hemming and Hicks were
smoking, one on each side of the upper hall window, which overlooked
the front steps, the driveway, and the great gates.

"The poor fellows will be sadly disappointed when they get in and
find the Tetsons and the money gone," remarked Hemming, calmly,
"though their stupidity in thinking them still here beats me."

"There are some things of value in the house," replied Hicks.

"Oh, yes; they might melt the silver," suggested Hemming, "but the
furniture would bother them.  Of course they will tear up the place,
and pot us, and try to get revenge that way."

"Yes," replied Hicks, "but I have a little stone about me."  He
opened his linen tunic, and unfastened a narrow cartridge-belt.  "I
wear it next my skin," he said, "and it galls me a bit sometimes."
He drew a brass shell from one of the loops and with his penknife
extracted a cork and a wad of cotton wool.  Then he shook something
white and rough, but glowing dimly, into the palm of Hemming's hand.
He laughed softly.

"The bridegroom's gift to the bride," he said,--"if the bridegroom
gets to the church."

Hemming gazed at it in silence.

"Cut and polished, what would it be worth?" asked its owner.  His
voice was low and eager.  He placed a trembling hand on his friend's
knee.

"I have seen diamonds in the rough before," replied Hemming, "but
never one as large as this.  Brazilian stones vary a good deal in
quality.  It may stand for a fortune, or perhaps for nothing more
than a respectable cottage, with stables, a paddock, and an orchard,
and maybe a shooting in Scotland."

"That would do for us," said Hicks, grinning like a schoolboy.  "Old
Tetson could manage the orchard, and Mrs. Tetson could see that he
didn't get his feet wet."  For a few moments he seemed to be
following this dream of bucolic bliss.

Then he continued: "I bought it in Pernambuco last December from a
drunken sailor, a cook or something like that, who had run away from
a wind-jammer.  He didn't think much of it.  It had been given him by
an old woman,--at least, so he said, but more likely he stole it.  I
paid fifteen _milreis_ for it,--fifteen _milreis_, with the exchange
at ninepence."

"Put it away," said Hemming, "and keep that belt next your hide, no
matter how much it galls."

Hicks replaced the stone in the empty shell, and the shell in his
belt.

"And she thinks I haven't a cent," he whispered.  "Isn't she a brick?"

The Englishman leaned back, out of range of the open window, and
relit his cigar.  Suddenly Hicks bent forward, listening.

"Did you hear that?" he said.

But Hemming had heard no unusual sound, only the footsteps of their
guards, and the noise of men singing at the barracks.

"It's the first time I have heard an old 'Sam Peabody' in Brazil,"
said the American.

"Who?" said Hemming, wondering if his friend's temperature had gone
up again.

"It's a bird, some sort of sparrow we have in the North," replied
Hicks.  He left the hall quietly, and hung out of a window in his own
room.  Presently, from the shrubbery below him, came the familiar
notes again.  He wet his lips with his tongue, and whistled the clear
call himself.  He was answered immediately.  He peered down into the
dim garden.  The only light was that of the stars.  He could see
nothing.  No leaf stirred in the shrubbery, and there was neither
sight nor sound of the enemy on that side of the house.

"If you don't intend to let us in," said a quiet voice, "you might
pass out a couple of drinks."

"Whiskey and soda for me," said the voice of Captain Santosa.

Hicks ran down-stairs, and Hemming followed him.  They unbarred a
window, and Smith stood ready with his rifle at port.  In crawled
O'Rourke and Santosa, very wet as to clothing, but very dry inside.

"The Campbells have arrived," said O'Rourke, brushing mud from his
leggings.  Hemming, for a moment, was dumbfounded at this unexpected
appearance.

"God bless you, Bertram," he said at last, and they shook hands
warmly.

"I thought, a few days ago, that it was chance that brought me to
Brazil," said O'Rourke, "but really, little fellow, it must have been
your guardian angel.  What a chap you are for getting into silly
messes.  There seems to be a row whenever you arrive."

"This row is not Hemming's fault," protested Hicks.  O'Rourke and
Hemming laughed happily, for both felt that, together, they could
pull out of the worst scrape ever invented.

"This gentleman would come," said Santosa, "and at a pace that nearly
wore me to the bone."

Just then Smith held a tray toward the late arrivals.

"We left McPhey organizing a relief expedition to come by land,"
O'Rourke informed them, after quenching his thirst, "and the major,
after doing his business, will bring a party up by boat,--a company
or two of government troops."

"Where did you leave the horses?" asked Hemming.

"Up the trail a little way, with a dusky admirer of yours," replied
O'Rourke.

The besieged returned to the upper hall.  Hicks gave a clear though
somewhat lengthy account of the rebellion.  Santosa told them of his
ride to Pernambuco and O'Rourke gave such news as he could of the
outside world.  Hemming, with his eyes on the dark blue square of the
window, tried to formulate a plan by which five men might protect
themselves and the property against five hundred a day or two longer.
He knew that, if the colonel really intended violence, the crisis
must soon come.

Santosa kicked off his boots, and went to sleep on the floor.  Hicks,
seated with his rifle across his knees, also slipped away to the land
of Nod.

"If you have no objections," remarked O'Rourke, "I will take a bath.
Hope the enemy won't make any hostile move while I'm splashing."

Hemming lit another cigar, and continued his watch by the open
window.  His arm pained him a good deal, so it was not hard to keep
awake.  He heard the guards tramping about, and now and then a few
words of conversation, or a snatch of laughter.  He heard music and
shouting in the distance, and sometimes the faint and hurried clatter
of hoofs.  All the windows in the town seemed alight.  A cool wind
stole across the palms.  His thoughts left the foolish, drunken men
without, and the adventurers within, and journeyed, with the wind,
far beyond the black palms and the little city.  The report of a
rifle brought him to his feet with a jump.  Hicks also was out of his
chair.  Santosa was pulling on his boots.  They hurried down-stairs
followed by O'Rourke in a bath-towel.

"If it's a fight," said O'Rourke, "I'll dry myself and join you.  If
it's just skirmishing, I'll go back to my tub."

They found Smith at his post in the billiard-room.

"What is the trouble?" asked Hemming.

"Family quarrel, I believe, sir," replied the valet.  "Two people
have been talking English for quite awhile, just a little way off
that window.  Then some one fired a shot, and they dusted.  Think it
was one of the guards, sir, who fired.  Drunk, I suppose."

"What were they talking about?" asked Hemming.

"Well, sir, I couldn't catch much of it," replied Smith, "but there
was something said about Mr. Tetson's steamer, the _Alligator_, and
about the firemen and engineers being prisoners.  From what I could
gather, she was captured about half a mile down-stream to-night on
her way up.  One of the men said that he had got a job on her,
because he had some important business to attend to up here."

"The devil!" exclaimed Hicks.  "I bet they had a letter for me."




CHAPTER XIII.

THE UNEXPECTED SAILOR

Morning came, and with it the colonel, on Hemming's white stallion.

"I see," said he, in Portuguese, "that Captain Santosa has returned."

Hemming nodded.  The colonel pressed a tremulous hand to a flushed
forehead.

"Damn it," he cried, "I would not have done so.  This place is the
devil.  The ice factory has shut down, and my drink has been warm for
two days."

"Very interesting," replied the Englishman, "but if you have nothing
more important to tell me, you will excuse me if I return to my bed."

The colonel raised his hand.

"One moment," said he.

Then he ordered his men out of ear-shot.  He rolled a cigarette, and
lit it with unseemly deliberation.

"I have been remarkably polite and friendly," he said, "but now I
have your steamer, and the crew in prison, and unless, my dear
fellow, we can agree--"  He stopped, and removed his hat, the better
to rub his brow.  Hemming yawned.

"The army," continued the Brazilian, "is in a dangerous mood.  Unless
you give me five thousand _milreis_ to-night,--only five thousand
_milreis_,--I fear that I can restrain my brave soldiers no longer.
But say nothing of it to Seor Cuddlehead."

"Give me time to shave," said Hemming, "and then--"

"And then?" asked the colonel.

"Why, and then," repeated Hemming, "tell the little beasts not to be
restrained any longer.  As for the money--you may go to the devil for
that."

The colonel sighed, and mopped his neck with his wilted handkerchief.

"It is too warm to fight," he said.

"You will find it so," retorted the Englishman.

The colonel looked up helplessly.

"My army," he sighed, "how can I restrain it?  I hate to fight, and
my head aches.  But my army must have some money."

"I don't see my way to help you," said Hemming.

"The revolution is a failure unless you surrender and pay," cried the
colonel.  "Don't you understand, my dear Hemming?  I do not like
bloodshed, but--well, you have ruined our gentler plan."

"You might carry away the table silver," replied Hemming, "but there
is no money.  That has all gone to the coast.  No doubt the house and
furniture, and even the forks and spoons, belong by now to the
Brazilian government.  It would be foolish of you to damage
government property for the sake of a few pounds.  It would mean
trouble, my friend."

The colonel sagged in his saddle like a bag of meal.

"I cannot argue," he said, listlessly.  "It is too hot to talk.  My
head aches--the devil take it.  You should not have sent the money."

"A touch of sun," suggested Hemming.

The fat Brazilian looked at the blue sky through bloodshot,
half-closed eyes.

"The sun," he said, "why, yes, the sun.  Damn the sun."

He swayed for a moment, and then slid in a heap to the ground.  His
men had been watching him, and now two of them ran forward and
carried the yielding, flabby body to the nearest fountain.

"Sun and whiskey," commented Hemming.  Then he returned to his
bedroom and commenced to shave.

By this time the little garrison was astir.  Hicks, with a sandwich
in one hand and his rifle in the other, opened the shutters of one of
the lower windows and looked out.  Not ten feet away stood a man in a
blue cotton shirt, and dirty canvas trousers.  The blotchy, grinning
face and bowed legs struck him with an unpleasant sense of
familiarity.

"Hello, mister," said the stranger.  "I'd like to 'ave a word wid one
of you gents."

"Which one?" asked Hicks.

"There you 'ave me," replied the man.  "Ye see, I was drunk an' it
were a dark night.  Don't know as I'd know 'im widout puttin' a few
questions."  He took a couple of steps toward the open window.  Hicks
put the remaining portion of the sandwich into his mouth, and shifted
the rifle.

"Ease off that thar gun a p'int or two," cried the sailor.

Hicks had been taught, while young, not to talk with his mouth full.
So he made no answer.

"I ain't looking fer no trouble," said the seaman.  "All I want is
ter come aboard an' 'ave a quiet jaw wid you and yer mates, afore
this blasted old craft 'awls down 'er colours."

"What about?" asked Hicks.

"That thar dimund, skipper," replied the man, with an evil grin.

Hicks changed colour.  O'Rourke stuck his head out of the window.  He
glared at the man in the blue shirt for several seconds.

"Belay that talk," he said, "and stop up the slack of it neat and
shipshape."

The man of the sea rolled his eyes in pained astonishment.

"So it was you, Mr. O'Rourke," he sneered.  "Now that's a gentleman's
trick for you."

"Yes, it was I kicked you down the hatch, if that is what you are
mentioning," replied O'Rourke, "and I think you know enough of me to
obey my orders on the jump.  I've eaten enough of your slush-fried
grub to kill a whole ship's crew, you thieving sea-cook.  I know you
for too big a coward to step out on to the foot-rope, but brave
enough to jab a marlinspike between a mate's ribs.  So clear out of
this."

The seaman shuffled his feet and grinned.

"Not so quick," he retorted; "'and over that dimund an' I'll go,
Mister O'Rourke."

"Diamond, you longshore gallows-bird, I don't know what you are
talking about, but I'll hand over something that'll make you hop, in
a minute," cried O'Rourke, in a fury.

Hicks threw his Winchester to his shoulder.  "Come right in," he
said, "or I'll blow the third button of your dirty shirt, counting
from the top, right through your chest."

The seaman pulled a hideous face, and spat into the dust.

"Guess I'll accept your kind invite," he said.  "It's real civil of
gents like you to treat a poor sailorman like this."  But he did not
move.

O'Rourke eyed him with a new interest, and Hicks squinted along the
black barrel.

"Don't trouble about that knife.  We will lend you one if we keep you
to lunch," said O'Rourke.

The fellow's face widened in a sickly smile as he entered the
billiard-room by way of the open window.  After relieving him of an
amazingly sharp sheath-knife, they tied his hands and feet and locked
him safe in an empty room.

"You see, O'Rourke, I am the man he is after; I have the diamond he
talks about," explained Hicks.

O'Rourke whistled softly, and smiled inquiringly at the big
fever-thinned secretary.

"Take it from him?" he queried.

"I bought it from him," replied Hicks, "and it's on me now."

"Hold on to it, then, old chap," said O'Rourke, "and don't gab.  He
hates me, anyway, so he may just as well keep on thinking I have the
stone.  He was cook aboard a barquentine in which I made a voyage
last year.  I was a passenger,--the skipper's friend,--and when the
skipper was sick I had to interview the cook once or twice."

The colonel died that evening, at a quarter past six, of too much rum
and whiskey and not enough medical treatment.  His soldiers had done
their best to save his life.  Three of them, with the best
intentions, held him upside down in a fountain for a good fifteen
minutes, at the very beginning of his illness.  Then they had carried
him to his own quarters, and watched him expire.

The Seor Cuddlehead now took command, for the officers were in a
funk.  Through an interpreter he lectured and encouraged the men.  He
assured them that, should Hemming escape from the house alive, they
would all swing for it, sooner or later; and that should they capture
and bear away the other inmates, every man would find himself rich.
What matter if the ladies had escaped, he said--surely the friends of
Mr. Hicks would gladly pay a great ransom, should they succeed in
carrying him away to the hills.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE ATTACK

When news of the colonel's death reached Hemming, he sighed with
relief.

"That ends it," he said.  "The old man was a fool, but he held them
together."

"What about that Penthouse-Cuddlehead chap?  He seems to be taking an
interest in it," said Hicks.

"He is sneak enough for anything, but he is also a coward," replied
Hemming.

"This is a poor sort of revolution," said O'Rourke.  "I have had more
excitement waiting for my mail at the window of a country
post-office.  A Sunday-school treat beats it hands down.  Davis could
invent a better one in his sleep."

"Please don't talk like an ass, old chap," said Hemming.  He found
the revolution quite exciting enough.

"I shall go and look at my prisoner--he may be in a better humour
than you," remarked O'Rourke, pensively.

Hicks followed him to the door of the locked room.

"These duffers don't want to fight.  They never did, either.  It was
all a bluff of the colonel's," he said.

The other shook his head.

"Wait until we hear from Hemming's enemy.  I think he'll take a turn
before we get out of this," he replied.  "He has played poor old
Hemming some low tricks before now," he added, and gave Hicks a hint
of the trouble in Hemming's past.  Hicks passed on and descended to
the billiard-room, and O'Rourke paused at the door.  He turned the
key and stepped into the room.  He dodged before his eyes had warned
him of danger.  The huge fist landed on a point of his left shoulder,
and sent him spinning across the room.  He recovered himself in time
to partially evade the seaman's bull-like rush.  Staggered and hurt,
he closed with his antagonist, wondering dully if the fellow had
broken the cords, or had worked the knots loose.  It did not occur to
him to call for help.  The door had closed behind him.  The mariner's
huge arms seemed to force his very heart out of its place.  The
bowed, sturdy legs wrenched at his knees.  The hot, evil breath
burned against his neck.  For a moment the pain of it closed his
eyes.  He was bent nearly double, and pin-points of light flashed in
his brain.  Then he recovered his wits and his courage.  He twisted
himself so that his shoulder caught the sailor's chin.  This gave him
a chance to breathe, and eased the crushing weight upon his ribs.  It
was O'Rourke's belief that, in a rough and tumble fight, without
knives, and muscles being equal, the gentleman has always the
advantage of the plebeian.  So once again he settled himself to prove
it.  But this time the plebeian was unusually desperate.  He wanted a
diamond, and he hated the man his hands were upon.  All his superiors
were detestable to his uncouth soul.  He had feared O'Rourke before
this.  Now he felt no fear--only a mad desire to knock the breath out
of that well-kept body, and mark with blood the hard-set, scornful
face.  Then for the coast again, with the stone of fabulous price.
For a minute or two O'Rourke played a waiting game.  Twice, by his
quickness and length of leg, he avoided a bad throw.  His back and
neck had some close calls.  After discovering that he was in better
condition than his opponent, he began to force matters.  Within ten
minutes of his entrance, he knelt upon the sailor's bulky shoulders,
and with colourless lips muttered strange oaths.  Though his eyes
were bright, he was not nice to look at.

The original savage glared exultingly from that white face.  The
sailor lay still, with blood from lips and nose staining the floor, a
pitiful and ungainly figure.

Presently O'Rourke got to his feet and staggered from the room.
Smith caught him just in time to help him to a chair.  It had been a
big effort for a warm day.

Hicks nursed the mariner back to his miserable existence.  This
required only a few minutes, for brandy had an almost magic effect
upon this outcast of the sea.  He emptied one decanter, and, seeing
no chance of a second, made a dash for the open window, taking the
sill in a flying jump.  But the window was on the second floor.  When
Smith went out to look at the body there was no trace of it.

"I could have sworn," said Hicks, with a shudder, "that I heard his
neck break, but maybe it was just the bushes giving way."

The night was bright with stars.  The little garrison sat up and
smoked by the open windows.  On the lower floor, windows were
shuttered and barred, and doors were locked.  If this game of war
were worth playing at all, it was worth playing well.  Shortly before
midnight some one staggered up to the front of the house, carrying a
paper lantern at the end of a stick, and singing.  The guards jeered
him.  It was the sea-cook, drunk and bedraggled.  He stopped his song
in the middle of a line, and waved his lantern toward the window
above him.

"Come out," he bawled, "an' gimme that dimund.  Gesh you thought I
couldn't jump out er that windy, didn't yer?  Gesh yer'll be jumpin'
outa it yerself perty soon."

The lantern caught fire, and the gaudy paper globe went up in a
little burst of flame.  The man threw it from him, and lurched on to
the veranda.  A scattered volley broke, here and there, from the
garden.  A few bullets pinged into the woodwork of the windows.
Shouts of laughter went up from the clusters of trees and shrubs.
The sailor hammered the front door.  The guards sneaked away into the
friendly shadows.

"They are all drunk," said Hicks, "and they'll try to rush us, for
sure."

"Then the colonel's death was not an unmixed blessing," remarked
O'Rourke.

Hemming ordered Smith and Hicks to windows on the other side of the
house.

"Shall we shoot over their heads, or may we pump it right into them?"
asked Hicks.

"I leave it to your own discretion," replied Hemming.

Smith grinned.  He promised himself an easy interpretation of the
word.

Hemming took the window in the upper hall, overlooking the front
steps and the driveway, himself.

There was not a figure in sight.  But the glass of the window lay
broken on the floor, and the diamond-hunter kept up his drunken
disturbance on the veranda below.  The firing out of the shadows
continued, and drew nearer.  Hemming extinguished his cigar and sat
on the floor.  He enjoyed quite a novel sensation when a bullet sang
its way through the open window, like a great bee, and ripped into a
shelf full of books half-way down the hall.  He had never before been
under fire behind a window.  All about him he could hear the thumping
of bullets against the tiles of the outer walls.  Some one shouted in
English, ordering the drunken sailor to come away from the house.

"Yer want my dimund, that's wot yer want," he shouted back, "but yer
don't get so much ash a peep at it, see?"

Hemming heard and frowned, as he polished his eye-glass on his
sleeve.  Two shots sounded in quick succession from a room on the
left of the hall.  Hemming heard Santosa laugh, and O'Rourke
congratulate him.  The firing now seemed to centre mostly upon the
front of the villa.  Hemming, as yet, had not returned a shot.
Suddenly the white man, moved by a drunken whim, left his hammering
at the door, and pranced into the starlight.  The shooting of his
friends was everywhere.  Elevation had little attention from them,
and an unusually low ball found him out.  He did not spring forward
with uplifted hands; neither did he clutch at his breast and stagger
onward.  With an expression of pained astonishment on his face, and a
heave of his fat shoulders, he sank to his hips, and then rolled over
and lay still.  To Hemming, it looked as if his fat legs had simply
crumpled under him like paper.

A dozen men charged across the starlit driveway.  Hemming dropped two
of them.  The others ran up the steps and across the veranda, and
threw themselves against the door.  But they were small men, and the
door was a heavy one, and well bolted.  Hemming left the window, and
at the head of the stairs met O'Rourke.

"A brace and a half to me," said that gentleman, lightly.

The bitter smoke drifted from doorway to doorway through the dark.
Hemming got his sword from his bedroom, and he and O'Rourke waited at
the top of the stairs.

O'Rourke's heart was glad within him.  Shoulder to shoulder with a
man like Hemming, it would be a lovely fight.  The door could not
give in soon enough to suit him.  He had ten shots in his revolvers.
Then he could break a few heads with his clubbed rifle, surely, and,
after that, when they had him down, he could kick for awhile.  He did
not think of his parents in the North, his friends, his half-written
articles, nor his creditors.  But he was sorry that Miss Hudson would
never hear of his heroic finish.

"We have had some fun together, and I hope this will not be the
last," said Hemming.  They shook hands.  Then the door came in with a
rending, sidelong fall.  A bunch of men sprang across it and made for
the staircase, just discernible to them by the light from the doorway.

[Illustration: "THE DOOR CAME IN WITH A RENDING, SIDELONG FALL"]

"Fire into the brown," said Hemming, quietly.

The four revolvers jumped and spit--once--twice--and the wounded
slipped back against their comrades' legs.  More men entered the hall
below, and filed wildly into the darkness above and around.  Then
Hicks, Santosa, and Smith left their windows and pumped lead into the
housebreakers.  The noise was deafening.  The air was unfit to
breathe.  O'Rourke wondered at something hot and wet against his leg.
Hemming was angry because none would come within cutting distance.
Smith felt very sick, but did not mention the fact.  He knelt against
the bannisters, and fumbled with the hammer of his revolver, and the
blood from a great furrow in his neck ran down one of the polished
rounds that supported the carved hand-rail.  But it was dark, and he
could not see it.  But presently he dropped his revolver and felt the
blood with his fingers, and wondered, in a dim way, who it was dared
to make such a mess in Mr. Tetson's house.

The firing outside the house, which had died away for a minute,
increased suddenly, and cries of warning and consternation rang above
it.  More men came to the open doorway.  They were armed with rifles
instead of the short carbines of the Pernamba army.  They discharged
a volley or two into the backs of the scrambling soldiers on the
stairs.

"That ends the revolution," remarked Hemming, calmly, removing his
monocle from his eye.

"I think we could have done it without help," said Santosa.

The men on the stairs cried for mercy.

"Are you all safe, up there?" asked a voice from the door.

Smith clung to the rounds of the bannisters and closed his eyes, and
O'Rourke leaned against the wall with one knee drawn up.

"The same leg," he muttered, and twisted his face at the pain of it.




CHAPTER XV.

REST IN PERNAMBUCO

Miss Tetson and Mr. Valentine Hicks were married in the little
English church in Pernambuco.  The ex-President gave the bride away,
the ex-commander-in-chief supported the groom, and the major
supported the clergyman officiating.  Mrs. McPhey supplied the
wedding breakfast, and McPhey made all the speeches.  Then the
Tetsons and Hicks sailed away for New York, leaving Herbert Hemming
to nurse Mr. O'Rourke and Smith.

The invalids were housed in cool rooms in the McPhey mansion, on the
outskirts of the city, and they and Hemming were guests of honour for
as long as they would stay in the country.

O'Rourke's leg was in a bad way, but poor Smith's neck was in a
worse.  For the first week of his attendance the clever American
surgeon who had them both in charge felt anxious enough for the
valet's life.  But modern methods and unflagging care won the day,
and a wound that, in the time of the Crimean War, meant certain
death, left nothing but a sunken white scar.

A couple of months passed quietly.  Hemming worked at a series of
short stories, and learned the gaudy-coloured, easy-going city by
heart.  He received several letters from Hicks, and heard that the
diamond had been sold at a good price.  O'Rourke pulled on his
riding-boots again, and exercised McPhey's stable, night and morning.

Hemming's white stallion was once more an inmate of this stable.
Smith recovered his strength slowly, and spent his days in easeful
meditations and unnamed regrets for the good time of fighting and
comradeship.

One day, Captain Santosa (who, through the influence of McPhey and
the major, had procured a commission in the cavalry regiment
stationed in Pernambuco) brought news of Penthouse's death to
Hemming.  Penthouse had been found in a dying condition in the hut of
a poor woman, on the trail above Pernamba, by a party of government
troops.  He had been shot during the attack upon the President's
villa, and, crawling away from the fight, had been found by the
peasant woman, and tended by her through his weeks of suffering.  She
had explained to the officer in command that an Englishman had been
kind to her, and for his sake she had housed and nursed this other
Englishman.  Thus, through Hemming's kindness, had his enemy received
kindness.



END OF PART II.




PART THREE



CHAPTER I.

THE REAL GIRL

Hemming and O'Rourke, with Smith as valet-in-common, reached New York
in November, and shivered in their tropical underclothes.  The dismal
aspect of the great city, as viewed at nine o'clock of a drizzly
morning, daunted even the valet.  At sight of the wide, wet streets
and soaring office buildings, depressing memories of Dodder's death
came to Hemming.  The chill brought a twinge to O'Rourke's leg, and
the swinging, clanging cars and hustling crowds offended his sense of
the fitness of things.

In a four-wheeler they went direct to a bachelor apartment-house on
Washington Square, in which their friend, Mr. Valentine Hicks, had
engaged for them an airy suite of rooms.  As they passed under the
white archway, entering the old square, their moods lifted.

"I believe I'll feel all right, when I get into a woollen
undershirt," said O'Rourke.

Hemming soon settled down to his work.  He was more systematic about
it than O'Rourke, working several hours every morning at articles for
the magazines, and part of every evening at a novel.  O'Rourke, who
had many friends and acquaintances in and about Newspaper Row, spent
but little of his time at home, and did his work when he had to.
Both O'Rourke and Hemming were frequent visitors at another house on
the square, where the Hickses and Tetsons lived in comfort.
Hemming's novel was built up, chapter by chapter, and relentlessly
torn down, only to be rebuilt with much toil.  The general outline of
the story had come to him years before, one night while he was
playing poker in the chart-room of an ocean tramp.  He had written a
few pages next morning, behind the canvas dodgers of the bridge.
Then it had been pushed aside by the press of other work; but he had
returned to it now and then, in many parts of the world.  The
chapters done in Pernamba were the only ones that did not seem to
require rewriting.  By this time the original plot was almost
forgotten, and a more satisfactory one had developed.

One Thursday night, having finished the twentieth chapter as well as
he knew how, he changed his clothes and went over to call on Mrs.
Hicks.  It was her evening.  He went alone, for O'Rourke had dined
out, and had not returned.  About a dozen people were already there.
While he was talking to McFarland of the Gazette, he noticed a girl
talking to their hostess.  Just why she attracted him he could not
say for a moment.  Mrs. Hicks was more beautiful, and there were at
least two women in the room as tastefully gowned.  She looked girlish
beside her stately hostess.  But there was a jaunty, gallant air
about the carriage of her head and shoulders, which seemed to Hemming
particularly charming.  Her voice was deep, and her laughter was
unaffected as that of a boy.

"You too?" laughed McFarland.

"I never saw her before," said Hemming.

"Then let me tell you now," said the editor, "that it is no use.
Even your eye-glass could not awaken her from her romantic dream."

"Count me out," replied Hemming, dryly, "but tell me something about
it."

"All I know," said McFarland, "is that there are ten of us--eleven
counting the lucky unknown.  We ten used to hate one another, but now
we are as brothers in our common misery.  But tell me, is it true
that you are working on a novel?  I don't see what you want to go
messing with fiction for, when you can do stuff like that Turkish
book."

While Hemming and the journalist chatted aimlessly in Mrs. Hicks's
drawing-room, O'Rourke made history across the square.  He had
returned to his quarters only a few minutes after his friend had
left; and had scarcely got his pipe well lighted when Smith announced
"a gentleman to see Captain Hemming, very particularly."  O'Rourke
got to his feet and found the gentleman already at the sitting-room
door.  The caller was in evening clothes.  His ulster hung open, and
in his hand he carried an opera-hat.

"Hemming is out for the evening," said O'Rourke, "but perhaps I can
give him your message.  Come in, won't you?"

The stranger entered and sat down by the fire.  He glanced about the
walls of the room, and then fixed an intent, though inoffensive, gaze
on O'Rourke.

"I heard, only this morning, that Hemming was in town," he said.  "We
saw a good deal of each other, once, in Porto Rico."

"In Porto Rico?" exclaimed O'Rourke, knitting his brows.

"Yes.  Have you ever been there?"

"No, though I've sampled most of the islands.  But go on--I
interrupted you.  I beg your pardon."

"Don't speak of it.  I only came for the address of a friend of
Hemming's.  But perhaps you could tell me in what quarter of the
globe Mr. O'Rourke hangs out?  He's a literary chap, and maybe you
know him."

"Bertram St. Ives O'Rourke?"

"Yes."

"Yes, I know him.  He is in town just now, at 206 Washington Square."

"Why, that must be very near here."

"It is," replied O'Rourke, with a strange light in his eyes and a
huskiness in his voice.

"Let me see," mused the other, "this is the Wellington, number two
hundred and--Lord, this is the place."

His dark face paled suddenly.

"My name is O'Rourke," remarked the big man with the pipe.

"And mine is Ellis," said the other.

They eyed each other squarely for several seconds.

"I have heard of you," said O'Rourke, in modulated tones.  But all
the while the blood was singing in his ears, and splashing wisps of
light crossed his eyes.

"And I of you," replied Ellis, quietly.  He had not yet regained his
colour.  O'Rourke, outwardly calm, turned in his chair and searched
among the papers on the table.  He found a leather cigar-case, opened
it, and extended it to his visitor.

"Try one of these.  We like them immensely," he said.

Now the red surged into Ellis's face, and he hesitated to receive the
cigar.

"Don't you know--how I have treated you?" he whispered.

"Please try a smoke--and then tell me why you came for my address.
The past is done with.  I am only afraid of the future now."

Ellis drew the long black weed from the extended case, and
deliberately prepared it for smoking.  When it was burning to his
satisfaction, he said:

"Do you know where the Hickses live?"

"Yes.  Hemming is there to-night."

"So is Miss Hudson," remarked Ellis.

O'Rourke jumped from his chair, and grasped the other by both hands.
Then he dashed into his bedroom and shouted for Smith.  When he was
half-dressed he remembered that he had forgotten to ask any
questions, or even to be excused, while he changed his clothes.  He
looked into the sitting-room.

"Forgive my bad manners, Mr. Ellis.  You see I'm in rather a rush,"
he said, gaily.

"Oh, certainly," exclaimed Ellis, starting up from a gloomy
contemplation of the fire.  He crossed over and smiled wanly at
O'Rourke.

"If you don't mind," he said, "I wish you'd keep quiet about my part
in--in this affair.  She would despise me, you know--and I couldn't
stand that."

"But I can tell her about to-night--about your kindness," suggested
O'Rourke.

Ellis shook his head and smiled bitterly.

"She may not look at it in so charitable a light as you do," he
replied, "so please put it all down to chance.  She does not know
that I have ever heard of you, except from her."

O'Rourke promised, and, after shaking hands, Ellis left his rival to
complete his toilet.  This he did in short order.

To return to the drawing-room across the square.  By degrees Hemming
drifted half around the room, and at last found himself against the
wall, between the door from the hallway and the table containing the
punch-bowl.

He was feeling a bit weary of it all, and sought refreshment in the
bowl.  He had almost decided to go home, when the door at his elbow
opened, and to his surprise O'Rourke entered, resplendent in white
breast, black tails, and eager smile.  This comrade tried and true
passed him without a glance--worse still, strode between his host and
hostess without a sign of recognition.  Glass in hand, and monocle
flashing, Hemming wheeled and stared after him.  Others looked in the
same direction.  Valentine and Marion smiled sheepishly at their
empty, extended hands.  But the lady of the gallant, shapely
shoulders and unaffected laughter faced the late arrival with the
most wonderful expression in the world on her face.  For a moment she
seemed to waver.  Then strong hands clasped hers.

"Bertram," she sighed.

"Dearest--am I too late?"

"But--oh, what do you mean?  See, they are all looking."

"I love you.  Didn't I ever tell you?  And I have searched the world
for you."

"Hush--see, they are all staring at us.  Oh, stop, or I shall
certainly cry."

She snatched her hands away from his eager grasp.

"But tell me," he begged, in a whisper, before she could turn away.
For a wonderful second their eyes read what the years of longing had
set behind the iris for love to translate.  Then she bowed her face,
and answered "Yes."

He did not know if she shouted it, or but murmured it beneath her
breath; it rang through his body and spirit like the chiming of a
bell.

"Drag me away," he whispered to Hicks.  "I don't want to make an ass
of myself before all these people."

"You've done that already.  Come into my study," said Hicks.

Hemming, scenting the truth, followed them.

"What is the matter with you?" asked Hicks.

"Don't you know your friends?  Is that the real girl?" asked Hemming.

O'Rourke ignored the questions.

"Give me a drink of something," he said, and, recovering a little of
his composure, smote Hemming violently on the back.

"Is it the real girl?" repeated Hemming, staggering.

"Do you think I'd make a mistake?" cried the lover.  He swallowed the
brandy brought him by Hicks, and requested a cigarette.  Their host
supplied it from a tin box on the mantelpiece, all the while eyeing
O'Rourke anxiously.

"What on earth made you act like that?" he asked.  "There'll be wigs
on the green when Marion gets hold of you."

"Oh, you must forgive him this time," laughed Hemming.  "For, as far
as I can gather, he has just met the lady of his heart after years of
separation."

"Do you mean Miss Hudson?  Why, where did you ever meet her?" cried
Hicks.

"It's a long story," replied O'Rourke, "but perhaps Herbert will tell
it to you--I can't spare the time."

He threw the half-smoked cigarette into the grate, and left the
study, closing the door behind him.

Hicks glanced uneasily at Hemming.

"I hope O'Rourke is not drunk," he said.  "An out and out city square
poet, who stays at home and writes about the rolling billows, I can
understand, but I never know what chaps like you and O'Rourke are up
to."

Hemming laughed.

"Don't worry about O'Rourke," he said.

Later in the evening Hemming found a gray-haired gentleman standing
alone, lost in contemplation of a black and white hunting picture.
He seemed dazed, and ill at ease.

"Mr. Hemming," he said, "my name is Hudson, and my daughter has just
introduced me to a Mr. O'Rourke.  Have you ever met him?"

"Several times," replied Hemming.

"A gentleman, I suppose?"

"Certainly."

"A man of property?"

"Inconsiderable."

"An adventurer, perhaps?"

"Just as I am."

"But, my dear sir, your connections and your reputation as a writer
places you above suspicion.  I had frequently heard of you before the
Pernamba episode."

"Thank you," said Hemming, with a crispness in his voice.

"But this man O'Rourke?" continued the other.

"O'Rourke," said Hemming, "lacks neither personal distinction nor
respectable family connections.  I have watched him under the most
trying circumstances, and his behaviour has always been above
criticism.  Also, he happens to be my dearest friend."




CHAPTER II.

A NEW RESTLESSNESS

  "All night long, in the dark and wet,
  A man goes riding by." ... R.L.S.


During the first few days following O'Rourke's sensational meeting
with Miss Hudson, Hemming saw very little of that headstrong young
man, for the lover spent his afternoons and evenings in making up for
lost time, and his mornings in rearing Spanish castles.  At first
Hemming took joy in his friend's happiness--then came envy, and bleak
disgust at his own case.  He sought refuge in hard work, and toiled
every morning with a half-heart for the subject in hand, and ears
pricked up for O'Rourke's babble of joy and content.  And behold, at
the end of a morning's grind, twenty pages for the fire.  Even his
novel came to a standstill.  The chapter of romance, which had the
joyful meeting of O'Rourke and Miss Hudson for its inspiration,
seemed to have no connection with the rest of the narrative, and no
excuse for existence save its own beauty.  He wondered if this
chapter were a story in itself--a breath of life's real poetry, too
fine and rare for marketing.  One night, alone in the sitting-room
brooding above the manuscript, he tried to rewrite it in verse.  A
new restlessness had him by the heart, lifting him, one moment, to
the heights of confidence, only to drag him down, the next, to the
depths of uncertainty and longing.  Three lines pulsed up to his
brain, and he wrote them down.  Then he opened his sitting-room
window and looked out.  The lights in the square gleamed down on the
wet pavement.  The black tree-tops threshed in the wind.  A cab sped
down from Fifth Avenue, under the arch.  A policeman paused beneath
him, and yawned at the bright entrance.

Hemming sniffed the wind, and decided to go for a walk.  He circled
the square three times.  Then he struck up Fifth Avenue, with his
hands in the pockets of his mackintosh and his stick under his arm.
The big old houses on each side of the avenue wore an air of kindness
that was not for him.  Lights were in the upper windows of most of
them.  One was still awake, and carriages waited in a solemn row at
the curb.  It seemed to Hemming that all the world but himself was at
peace.  The coachmen and footmen waited contentedly outside, while
their masters and mistresses laughed and danced within.  What had
these people to do with the bitterness of the unattainable?  His eyes
were turned in upon his own heart, and nothing seemed real but this
new restlessness, this nameless desire like a crying in the dark.  It
was not for fame, nor altogether for the power of expression, though
that, at one time or another, will tear the heart of every artist.
It was not bred of any regret for the past, nor inspired by
apprehension for the future.  On the fly-leaf of a friend's book he
had once read the words, "There is only the eternal now--an oasis of
fleeting actuality between two deserts of mirage."  Now he remembered
the words as he strolled up Fifth Avenue.  The Eternal Now!  Could it
give him no more solace than this?  For him would it be always this
empty room, from the windows of which he might look backward upon one
mirage and forward to another?  He felt in his pockets for something
to smoke.  They were empty, so he decided to keep on until he could
find a tobacconist's establishment.  Deep in thought, buffeted and
yet soothed by the bleak wind, he strode along, with little heed to
his course.  Presently, upon glancing up, he found himself on a side
street, before the area railings of a basement restaurant that he
knew well.  Here he could get a Porto Rican cigar to which he was
particularly partial, or cigarettes of pungent tobacco rolled in
sweet brown paper.  He opened the iron gate, descended the steps, and
rang the signal of the initiated on the bell.  The Italian woman
opened the door, and smilingly admitted him.  In the larger of the
two dining-rooms only one table was occupied, for stray customers
were not welcomed after the regular dinner hours.  At the table sat
two men whom Hemming knew, and one who was a stranger to him.  They
were drinking coffee and smoking, and from a chafing-dish in the
centre of the table drifted an odour with a tang to it.

Upon Hemming's entrance, Potts, assistant editor of a ten-cent
magazine, called to him to join them.  The Englishman did so, gladly.
Akerly, the illustrator, he knew, and he was introduced to the third,
a thick-shouldered, blond-haired youth, by name Tarmont.  Tarmont
also proved to be an artist.  He was a Canadian by birth, and had
just arrived in New York from a two years' visit in England.

"I was staying in Norfolk awhile," he said, "with some cousins, and I
met a friend of yours."  He looked intently at Hemming as he spoke,
and Hemming started eagerly in his chair.  But in a moment he sat
quiet again.

"More than one, for that matter," continued Tarmont.  "There was
Major Anderson,--he talked a great deal of you one night, after some
one had mentioned wars, and that sort of thing,---and there was an
old chap who argued about you with an old dame, the same evening.
Really, your memory seemed to bulk large in their eyes."  He paused,
and smiled at his companions.  "Oh, I forgot," he added; "there was a
lady--very pretty, too--who stopped playing ping-pong with me to
listen to what they were saying about Captain Hemming.  Of course she
didn't give that for a reason."

"What was her name?" asked Hemming.

Tarmont shook his head, and, producing his cigarette-case, lit a
mild, fat Turkish.

"I'm no good at names," he said, "but she seemed to be about
twenty-eight in age, and was beautifully set up, a trifle on the thin
side--and had ripping fine eyes, and hair with copper in it."

Even Hemming laughed.

"You must have spent all your precious time staring at her," remarked
Potts.

"Well, I did," confessed the artist, "for I was in love with her,
man.  Even now, whenever I draw a girl I make her waist and her arms.
As for the look in her eyes--my dear fellow, I can never forget it."

"What sort of a look was it?" asked Akerly, hugely amused.

"A look of longing," replied Tarmont, in tragic tones.  "It was
deucedly disconcerting, too, for the man she happened to be talking
to.  It always made me feel as if I had a hole in the middle of my
chest, through which she could see some chap whom she was anxious to
embrace.  We all noticed that Anderson didn't like it at all."

Potts and Akerly roared with laughter.

"You should be a novelist," said Potts.

Akerly ordered a round-bellied, wicker-covered flask.  But Hemming
only pondered over what he heard.

It was close upon two o'clock in the morning when Hemming got back to
the Wellington.  He found O'Rourke snug in his bed, smiling even in
his sleep.  He closed the bedroom doors softly, stirred up the fire,
and sat down to his story.  Still the wind galloped through the
square, slashing the tree-tops, and riding against the house-fronts.

It was dawn when Hemming laid aside his pen, knocked the smouldering
heel from his pipe, and went wearily to bed.




CHAPTER III.

A ROLLING STONE

The life of New York did not suit Hemming, although his work
progressed at a round pace.  He awoke in the mornings to no
expectations of joy or adventure.  The dulness of each approaching
day weighed upon him even before his eyes opened.  He saw but little
of O'Rourke after the luncheon hour, and, though he and Tarmont
became quite friendly, loneliness made his days miserable.  He began
to regret even the foolish, anxious days of the Pernamba revolution.
In his blue mood he would sometimes call on the Tetsons and
Hickses--but, alas, in conventional environment they had lost much of
their charm.  Hicks was growing fat and self-complacent.  Marion was
growing commonplace under the burden of formalities.  Even the old
man was undergoing a change--had already been weaned from his yellow
cigar and taught to wear a four-in-hand necktie until dinner-time.
As for Mrs. Tetson, kindly soul, why, she now spent most of her days
in contented slumber, and sometimes drove in the park of an afternoon.

Hemming sometimes went to dinner at the Hudsons' with O'Rourke.  Mrs.
Hudson was dead, and Helen and her father made up the family.
Hemming found these evenings quite worth while.  Miss Hudson was as
clever as she was charming, and as sympathetic as she was original.
Mr. Hudson was a kind-hearted, exceedingly well-bred banker, with a
cultivated taste in wines and cigars.  Under his daughter's
leadership he sometimes talked brilliantly.  After these dinners
Hemming would always stay as long as he could without feeling himself
in the way; then, after a word or two with Mr. Hudson in the library,
he would return to the lonely sitting-room and write letters to Miss
Travers.  These he burned as soon as written.  This was foolishness,
and worried Smith a good deal.

Tarmont, who guessed Hemming's case, got into the habit of dropping
in on his new friend at unseemly hours.  If Hemming wanted to talk,
Tarmont was ready to listen.  If Hemming wanted to listen, Tarmont
was glad to chat about his stay in England.  If Hemming wanted to
continue his work, Tarmont was delighted to smoke in silence,--always
those fat Eastern cigarettes,--with his heels on any convenient piece
of furniture that happened to be higher than his head.  One night he
brought a chap named Stanley along with him.  On this occasion his
visit was timed many hours earlier than usual--in fact, Hemming was
only half-way through his first cigarette since dinner.  Stanley
interested Hemming from the first--all the more so because Tarmont
whispered, while Stanley was examining a shelf of books, that he
would not stand for his companion's behaviour, or anything else, as
he had met him for the first time only that morning.

Stanley looked and sounded like a man without a care in the world,
though in his black hair shone threads of silver.  His manner was of
complete good-humour, despite the suggestion of heartless deviltry in
his dark eyes.  His complexion was of a swarthy clearness, like a
Spaniard's, and in the cleft of his massive chin gleamed a small
triangular scar.  Something about him suggested to Hemming a gull
blown inland.  He talked of a dozen things dear to Hemming's
heart,--of salmon fishing in Labrador, of the sea's moods, of London,
of polo, and of current literature,--treating each from the
view-point of an outsider.  The others were contented to sit quiet
and listen.  Many of his adventures by land and sea would have been
laughed at by ordinary stay-at-homes, or even by Cook's tourists, but
Hemming's knowledge of such things enabled him to see probabilities
where Tarmont suspected lies.  He was still spinning yarns when
O'Rourke came in.

Several days passed before Hemming again saw Stanley--restless,
painful days for Hemming, for Stanley's stories had reawakened all
that was vagrant in his blood; the other side of his heart was
longing for England, and pride and self-ordained duty held him in New
York.  Also, the condition of his dearest friend was getting on his
nerves.  To see the man who had so often sworn that change and
adventure were the breath of life to him eyeing furniture with
calculating glances, pricing dinner-sets, and drawing plans of
cottages on the margins of otherwise neglected manuscripts, struck
him as verging on the idiotic.  So he prowled about the town, and
smoked more than Smith considered good for him.  Late one night, upon
leaving an up-town studio, where a pale youth made priceless posters
and delectable coffee, he was overtaken by Stanley.

"Where are you off to?" asked Stanley.

"Home," replied Hemming.

"Are you sleepy?"

"No."

"Then I wish you'd let me come along.  I want to talk."

Hemming assured him that he would be delighted to listen, and,
hailing a belated cab, they drove to Washington Square.  O'Rourke and
Smith were both asleep.  Hemming closed their doors, and lit a couple
of candles to help the firelight make shadows up the walls.  Then
Stanley told something of his story.  In his youth he had inherited a
small fortune.  At first he had spent it foolishly, but after years
of knocking about, had learned how to save it, and even add to it.
The sea had been his ambition and delight ever since his first days
of freedom.  Early in his career he had qualified as a navigator.  He
told of trading-schooners in Newfoundland and Labrador, in which he
was interested; of a copper-mine somewhere that he had discovered
himself, and sold to an English syndicate; of a venture in the
sponge-fishery off the Florida coast, and of his apprenticeship to
pearl-diving.  He told of a blunt-nosed old barque in which he owned
a one-third interest and on which he had sailed as master for half a
dozen voyages, doing a very profitable smuggling business on the
side.  He even confessed to an irregular career as a journalist in
Australia.

"I have always found my profits," he said, "and managed to live well
enough.  It is an easy world, if you have any brains at all, but, for
all that, it is horrible.  The longer a man lives--the oftener he
saves himself from defeat--the gayer he makes his fun--then, when he
lies awake at night, the more he has to sweat and pray about."

Hemming nodded.  "They pile up," he remarked; then, fearing that
gloomy reflections might get the better of his guest's desire to
talk, he asked him why he had given up his berth aboard the barque.

"Had important business to look after ashore," replied Stanley.  In
bending over the table to light a cigarette at a candle, he looked
keenly at his host.

"And there was another reason--a damn sight better one," he said,
quietly.

He sank back in his chair and blew a thin thread of smoke.

"We were in Bahia with fish," he continued, "and I got foul of one of
the hands--for the last time.  The memory of his big face makes me
feel ill to this day."

"What!" exclaimed Hemming.  "Do you mean to tell me you let one of
the crew lay you away?"

"Not quite," laughed Stanley, harshly.  He touched the scar on his
chin.  "That's what he gave me--with a knuckle-duster," he explained,
"and what I gave him he took ashore to the hospital.  His messmates
were not particularly fond of him, but, for all that, I considered it
wise to live quietly ashore for awhile."

"You must have handled him rather roughly," remarked the Englishman.

"I killed him," said Stanley.  "I beat the life out of him with my
bare fists."

"You beast," said Hemming, his face blanched with horror and disgust.

"Oh, cheer up, old Sunday-school teacher," replied Stanley,
good-naturedly.  "I had reason enough for killing the slob.  He hit
me first, for one thing.  Then there was a girl in the case--a little
brown girl, who wouldn't look at a dirty brute like him, for all that
he told to the contrary.  He was ship's bully until he got aft to the
cabin."

He emptied his glass, and looked, with an expression of bored
expectancy, toward the darkest corner of the room.

"It's about time for him now," he said, "but maybe you don't believe
in ghosts.  He favours me with a sight of his ugly mug almost every
night.  Can you see him there?"

Hemming turned with a start, but only black shadows were in the
corner.  Stanley laughed.

"What a pity," he said, "for I am sure you would be more interested
than I."

Hemming drew close to the fire, and, when his back was turned,
Stanley, with a wary eye on the shadows, grabbed the decanter of
Scotch and gulped down a quantity of the raw liquor.  In a moment he
seemed himself again.  He set the decanter softly back upon the
table, and, with his hands in his trousers pockets, moved over to the
window and looked out at the cold roofs, level against the dawn, and
at the lift of the silent chimneys.  His jaws were set hard, swelling
the muscles under the swarthy skin.  He feared a hand upon his
shoulder--the heavy touch of a thick, toil-worn hand.  He awaited,
dreading, the rank breath of the dead seaman against his ear.
Presently he turned his head, and looked again at the shadowy corner.
It was lighter now.  But crouched there close to the floor, as he had
crouched upon the hot deck, with red hands knuckle down, and blood
upon the ugly, upturned face, was the bully of the barque.  The
candles burned softly, throwing their kindly radiance upon books and
pictures.  Hemming sat by the fire, puzzled, but at peace.  Wrenching
his gaze from the hideous apparition beyond, Stanley looked enviously
at Hemming--at the clean, brave face, whereon hardships and
adventures had hardened not a line.

Hemming fell asleep in his chair.  When he opened his eyes, the room
was full of sunlight and his guest had gone.  He could hear O'Rourke
splashing and singing in his bath, and Smith stood at his elbow with
a cup of tea.




CHAPTER IV.

"THE DEAR, DEAR WITCHERY OF SONG"

The two friends sat late over their breakfast.

"If anything happens to me before night, will you see that I am
decently buried?" said O'Rourke.

"I don't see what more is to happen to you--except bankruptcy,"
retorted Hemming.

"Oh, I intend getting down to work again right away," O'Rourke
hastened to say.  "That is part of my trouble," he added.  "You know
that Mr. Hudson, for all his good points, has some jolly queer
notions in his head.  He had not known me more than a week before he
asked me to let scribbling alone and give business a chance.  I told
him that scribbling was good enough for me.  He said prose was bad,
but to see a bushy chap, six feet high, writing poetry, simply made
him sick.  I was mad, but--well, I was also afraid.  I know him
better now.  He made me promise not to mention the conversation to
Helen, and tried to fire my soul with the desire for banking.  He
even offered me a job.  Well, to oblige him I determined to try to
give up writing, and I've been struggling along now for nearly three
weeks.  Gad, I'm sick of it.  Helen does not know, of course, what
the matter is, and thinks I'm out of condition, or that her company
is not inspiring; and all the time the finest things are swinging
about in my head, and my fingers are itching for a good corky
penholder.  Last night I realized that both my money and peace of
mind were leaving me, so I turned out early this morning and wrote
seven verses to Helen, and sketched out two stories, and an article
on the Jamaica fruit trade, and now I'm going to tell old Hudson that
he can go--I mean that I will not consider his proposition a moment
longer."

"And what about the lady?" asked Hemming.

"Who--Helen?  Oh, she'll make it warm for her father when she hears
about it, I can tell you," answered O'Rourke.

While Hemming interviewed Smith on household topics, O'Rourke
scribbled a quatrain on his cuff, and then invented conversation
between himself and Mr. Hudson.  This form of amusement is
exciting--better even than writing dialogue.  One cannot help
figuring as the hero.  The best time for it is when you are walking
alone, late at night, perhaps in a rainstorm.  The ideas swing along
with your stride, and the words patter with the rain.  But O'Rourke,
in his mood, found nine o'clock in the morning good enough, and, by
the time Hemming was ready to go out, had made sixteen different
wrecks of poor Hudson's ideas on the subject of authorship as a
profession.  His courage returned to its normal elevation, and as
they walked along he entertained Hemming with his brave dreams of the
future.

The friends parted company at the door of Hemming's publishers;
O'Rourke took a car for an up-town resident quarter.  He might have
seen Mr. Hudson at his office, which was on Broadway, but he wanted
to see Helen first, and assure himself of her support.

Helen was pleased, though surprised, at seeing him so early.  She
received him in the morning-room, which was delightfully informal.
He asked her to ride with him at four o'clock, and spoke as if this
was his reason for calling.  But she thought not.  Presently she
caught sight of the neat lettering on the otherwise spotless cuff,
and without so much as "by your leave" took hold of his wrist, pushed
back his coat-sleeve, and read the quatrain.

"My dear boy," she said, "it is fine.  And I was just beginning to
fear that this old town had made you stupid, or--or that my
companionship makes you dull.  I wondered if, after all, I was not
inspiring."

"You not inspiring!" exclaimed O'Rourke.  "Why, I have had to smother
more inspirations during the last few weeks than I ever had before in
all my life.  There's more inspiration in one of your eyelashes than
in all the hair on all the heads of all the other people in the
world."

"Silly," she said.

O'Rourke did not retort in words.

"But why did you smother the inspirations, you boy?" she asked,
presently.

"I can't tell you now," he replied.  "But at four o'clock I'll
confess all.  You want the red mare, I suppose.  I'm off now to see
your pater.  Wish me luck, little girl."

Helen smiled.

"I hope you don't let all your cats out of their bags as easily as
that," she said.  "But it will save you the trouble of making
confession later.  Yes, the red mare, please.  And, dear boy, I'll
have a little talk with father at lunch, and he will never make you
smother your dear inspirations again.  There, that will do.  Now run
away and beard the lion.  Really, you behave as if you were afraid of
never finding me again."

"Oh, I've made sure of you this time," he said.  Then he remembered
the seven verses, and, pulling them from his pocket, read them aloud.
The fire in the morning-room was wonderfully cheerful.  The clock
clicked softly, and chimed once or twice, unheeded.  They talked a
great deal, and made plans for the future, and O'Rourke smoked a
cigarette.  When Mr. Hudson came home to his lunch, he found them
still engaged in conversation beside the morning-room fire.  They
looked guiltily at the clock.  O'Rourke bowed to Mr. Hudson, and
extended his hand.

"I have decided, sir, to stick to scribbling," said he.

[Illustration: "'I HAVE DECIDED, SIR, TO STICK TO SCRIBBLING'"]

"Did you ever think of not sticking to it?" she asked.  O'Rourke
gazed straight ahead, and had the grace to blush.  A truthful woman
can always--well, act--with more ease than a truthful man.

"I am not fit for anything else," he said.

"Dear me, dear me," said Hudson, glancing nervously at his daughter.
"I haven't a doubt that you are right, Bertram.  A man should be the
best judge himself of what he is good for."

"And now," said the lady, "you may stay to lunch.  But you must hurry
away right afterward for the horses."

So O'Rourke remained to lunch, and was vastly entertaining, and Mr.
Hudson thawed again, having decided, during the soup, to accept the
inevitable.




CHAPTER V.

AN UNCANNY GUEST

Hemming finished his novel and took it to his publisher.  Then he
decided to go somewhere,--to get out of New York and back to the life
that meant something.  He confided his intention to O'Rourke, and
later to Smith.

"I wish you'd wait for awhile," pleaded O'Rourke, "and then I'd go
with you."

"How long do you want me to wait?" asked Hemming.

"Oh, until we're married."

"Great Scott, man, surely you don't intend deserting your bride
immediately after the marriage ceremony!"

"Not much," exclaimed O'Rourke, "but she could come, too."

Hemming stared, for he knew that many of his friend's jokes required
a lot of looking at; and Smith, who was tidying the table, hid his
smile in the duster.

"What have you been drinking?" inquired Hemming at last.  O'Rourke
made a movement as one awaking from a trance.  He smiled foolishly.

"Forgive me," he said; "for a moment I quite forgot what sort of
trips we used to indulge in.  Of course it would never do to take
Helen on jaunts like those."

"I wonder if you are old enough to take care of a wife," said his
friend, severely.

When Hemming returned to his rooms late that evening, he was still
undecided as to where he would go.  O'Rourke was away at some sort of
function.  Hemming had been walking for more than an hour, aimlessly,
but at a hard pace.  As he dropped wearily into his chair, Smith
entered, and handed him a paper from the table.  It was a note from
Stanley, written in red ink on the back of a laundry list.  It ran as
follows:


"Hurry 'round to my diggings as soon as you get this.  I want you to
meet my seafaring friend, who seems in a mood to honour me with a
visit of some length.  He is very droll, and looks as if he means to
stay.  I send this by our hall boy.

  "Merrily yours,
        "T. F. STANLEY."


He found Stanley alone in a big and lavishly furnished room.  He sat
at a table, whereon stood two glasses, a syphon of soda-water, and a
decanter.  He stood up upon Hemming's entrance.  "Ah," he said, "this
is good of you.  We had almost given up hopes of seeing you to-night."

"I was out," replied Hemming, "and just got your note.  Where is your
seafaring friend?"

"Allow me to introduce you," said Stanley.  "Mr. Kelley, my friend,
Mr. Hemming."

Hemming looked about him, open-mouthed, and, though he straightened
his monocle, he could see neither hair nor track of Mr. Kelley.

"What is your game?" he inquired, icily.

"It is as I feared," said Stanley, "and I assure you the loss is
yours.  I alone may enjoy Kelley's delightful society, it appears.
His very smile, as he sits there, has a world of humour in it.  He
tells such droll stories, too, of his adventures by land and sea."

Hemming caught him roughly by the arm.  "What damned nonsense is
this?" he asked.

Stanley pulled himself away, and the Englishman, fearless though he
was, felt daunted by the strange light in his host's eyes.

"If you don't like my friend, why, get out!" cried Stanley.  "If
you're a snob, and won't drink with a common sailor, and a dead one
at that, why, just say so.  But I tell you, Hemming, I like him.  I
didn't when I killed him, but I love him now.  You should hear him
sing."

For a moment Hemming stood undecided.  Then he removed his overcoat,
and drew a chair for himself up to the table.

"I am very stupid to-night," he said, smiling.  "Of course I'll have
a drink with you and Kelley.  Just a couple of fingers, old chap.
Kelley seems a good sort.  Do you think he will favour us with a
song?"

Stanley got another glass, and poured the whiskey for his guest.  His
face was haggard, though he was clearly pleased with Hemming's change
of manner.  "Oh, he is a good sort, sure enough," he said, "but I
don't believe you could hear him sing.  It is all I can do sometimes.
He has a fine voice, but he is a bit handicapped by the cut in his
lip.  Do you notice the cut in his lip?  I gave him that years ago.
Knocked four or five teeth down his neck, too, I guess.  Do you know,
Hemming, I was afraid, when you first came in, that you thought me
nutty."

For a little while Stanley seemed sunk too deep in meditation for
utterance.  He looked up presently, but not at Hemming.

"Kelley," he said, "_you_ can understand being afraid of a man, and
there was a time when _I_ was afraid of a ghost, but what do you
think of a man who is afraid of a woman?"  He paused for a moment,
and seemed to receive an answer, for he laughed and continued, "Just
my sentiment, old cock.  She isn't after him with a knife, either.
She is in love with him, and once he was in love with her, but now
he's afraid to go within miles of her.  He's in love with her, too;
at least, so they told Tarmont."

Hemming jumped from his chair.  "Who the devil are you talking
about?" he cried.

Stanley glared blankly for a moment.

"Why, sure enough; I'm talking about you," he said.

"See here, Stanley," exclaimed the Englishman, earnestly, "are you
drunk, or are you mad, or are you only making a fool of yourself, and
trying to make one of me?"

"I am not drunk," replied the other, slowly, "and why should I try to
make a fool of you?  Some one has saved me that trouble.  But I may
be mad, old chap, though I haven't taken to biting people yet."

Hemming started, and glanced about him uneasily.  "Well, I really
must go," he said; "I have some work to do," and he hurried away
without shaking hands.  He went to the nearest drug-store, where he
might use the public telephone.  He was about to ring up a doctor
when an amused chuckle at his shoulder arrested him.  He turned his
head.  There stood Stanley, leering pleasantly.

"Don't trouble yourself.  I'm not wanting medical advice just now,"
said Stanley.  In his confusion, Hemming blushed guiltily, and left
the telephone, and the shop, without a word.  As he passed into the
street, he heard Stanley laughing with the cashier, very likely
explaining his action as that of a harmless idiot.

Hemming made all speed to Washington Square.  O'Rourke had not yet
returned, but on a scrap of paper among his manuscripts he found
Tarmont's address.  With the help of a cab, he was soon in that
gentleman's studio.  But, to his disgust, he found that he was not
the only visitor.  Half a dozen men were lounging on the wide divans,
smoking.  Hemming managed to get Tarmont away from the crowd.

"Have you seen Stanley to-day?" he asked.

"Not since last night.  Why?"

"He is mad as a hatter.  Thinks he is entertaining some dead sailor
in his rooms."

"Heavens!" exclaimed the artist.

"He talked rather wildly about several things," said Hemming, "and
quoted you concerning a girl in England--and me."

"He may have heard me speaking of it," returned Tarmont, defiantly.
"He was here last night."

"Why didn't you tell me?" asked the Englishman.

"It was just country-house gossip," replied the artist, "and I hardly
thought you would thank me.  I imagined you were old enough to know
your own business best."

"It was country-house gossip, and now you have made studio gossip of
it," said Hemming, tartly.

"I am very sorry," said Tarmont, honestly.




CHAPTER VI.

THE BACHELOR UNCLE TO THE RESCUE

The years since Hemming's departure had brought little of joy to
Molly Travers.  At first anger at herself had occupied her mind.
Then had come a short-lived anger toward Hemming for not writing or
returning.  Now she looked at life with a calm heartlessness.  When
she learned the true story of Penthouse a white fury entered into
her, and she knew that there was not a person in the world whom she
would now trust,--save Hemming, the man who despised her.  Her mother
tried to comfort her; tried to reason with her; tried to soothe her
with platitudes and eligible suitors.  For her pains, the poor woman
was snubbed.  So were the suitors--at first.  But, as the seasons
wore around, with no word of love or forgiveness from the man whose
love she had tramped on, Miss Travers decided to take her revenge on
the world.  She took it daintily, and the world hardly knew what she
was about.  First, and always, there was Anderson.  At first, love
for the girl, and loyalty for his friend, struggled hard within him.
Love won against loyalty.  Then he found that she did not care.  He
was of a hopeful disposition, and continued to make a fool of himself
even to the last, as you shall see.  There were others,--a subaltern,
a lawyer, the son of a colonial premier, and a baronet.  It was
always so cleverly done that not one of them could lay the blame on
her.  Tarmont, the young artist, was the first to understand.  He
saved himself just in time.

Mrs. Travers was in despair, especially when the baronet rode away.
At last it occurred to her that still the memory of Hemming, the
adventurer, stood between her daughter and a comfortable settlement
in life.  Why any one should prefer the memory of a poor man to the
reality of a rich one, she really could not see.  She was afraid to
ask Molly for a solution of the problem (having learned something by
experience), so she wrote a note to her brother.  Mr. Pollin came
promptly, and gave ear to the narration of her troubles with polite
concern.  When she had made a piteous end of it, he told her that she
was fretting herself quite unnecessarily.

"I'll speak to Molly," he said, in a reassuring voice.

"But she does not like being spoken to," complained Mrs. Travers.

"Oh, she is really a sensible girl, and I am not afraid of her," said
Mr. Pollin.

"Had I better call her now?" suggested the lady.

"Lord, no!" cried her brother.  "I'll see her alone,--some other day."

One morning, Molly received a visit from her bachelor uncle, much to
her surprise.  What little she knew of her uncle rather attracted
her.  More than once she had detected signs of thought, even of
intellect, in his conversation.  Also, she had heard something of his
early career and of the articles he had written.  She greeted him
brightly.  He held her hand, and glanced around the depressing
drawing-room.

"My dear, this is no place to talk," he said.

"No, not to really talk," she agreed, "but it is not often used for
that."  Then she looked at him suspiciously.  "Are you going to scold
me about something, uncle?" she asked.

He laughed, and shook his head.

"Oh, no.  I am not as courageous as I look," he replied.

She wondered if this round, trim, elderly gentleman really imagined
that he looked so.

"I don't know where else we can go," she said.  "Mother is in the
morning-room, and the library is being cleaned."

"If you will come for a walk," he said, with a winning hesitancy in
his manner.

Molly smiled.  "I'll come," she answered, "though I am quite sure you
have something very disagreeable to say, otherwise why all this
trouble?"

"My dear girl," began Mr. Pollin, "I do not wonder at your suspicion.
Really, though, it is without grounds.  I simply want to become
better acquainted with an interesting and charming niece whom I have
hitherto somewhat neglected."

"Then it is a matter of duty," laughed Molly.

"On your part, my dear," replied her uncle, with a gallant bow.

"Then wait a moment," she said, and left the room.

The moment lengthened into twenty minutes, at the end of which time
Miss Travers reappeared, gowned for the street.

"By gad, I don't blame the young fools!" muttered Mr. Pollin to
himself, as he followed her down the steps.  At first their
conversation was of trivialities.  It soon worked around to books,
and Molly found, to her delight and surprise, that her uncle had not
altogether forsaken his first love, to wit,--literature.

"I have cloaked myself with the reputation of a gossip," he told her,
"to hide my greater sins of serious reading and amateur scribbling.
A literary man must be successful from the most worldly point of
view, to be considered with any leniency by his friends.  So I keep
dark, and enjoy myself and the respect of--of the people we know.
When I was younger, I was not so wise."

"I have heard about it," returned Molly, "and I always liked you for
it.  But I think you were a coward to give it up just as soon as you
came in for money."

Mr. Pollin smiled somewhat sadly.

"I was never anything more than a dabbler.  That is my only excuse
for shunning the muse in public," he replied.  "But here we are at
the door of my humble habitation."

"I have seen the door before.  It looks very nice," remarked Molly.

"On the other side of that door," said Mr. Pollin, standing still and
surveying the oak, "are two hundred and odd rare volumes, and three
times as many more or less common ones,--also some easy chairs, and a
man-servant capable of producing a modest luncheon."

"And cigarettes?" asked Miss Travers.

The gentleman gave her a look of pained inquiry.

"For you, my dear girl?" he queried.

"I have not smoked a cigarette for years," she replied, "but I
learned how--oh, long ago."

"I have some excellent cigarettes," rejoined Mr. Pollin, kindly, as
he fitted his latch-key in the door.

Molly found that, for a poor bachelor, her uncle lived very
comfortably.  She really did not see how one man and his valet could
use so many rooms.  The library was a charming place, walled with
shelves of books, and warmed and brightened by a glowing fire.  The
floor had no carpet, but was thickly strewn with rugs.  The chairs
were of modern pattern and wicker ware, built for comfort rather than
for looks.  The big writing-table had books, magazines, and
manuscripts scattered over it.

Mr. Pollin rang for his man, who appeared on the instant.

"My niece, Miss Travers, will lunch with me," he said.

"Very good, sir," replied the man, and hesitated at the door.

"Well, Scanlan?" inquired his master.

"General Davidson, sir,--and the lady, sir,--will that be hall?"

"Good Lord!" exclaimed Mr. Pollin, "I'd forgotten the general.  You
don't mind old Davidson, do you, Molly?"

"I'm sure I do not know.  I have never met him," replied Molly.

"That will be all," said Mr. Pollin to the man, and, as soon as the
door closed, he turned to Molly and said: "Now, my dear, we have just
an hour before that old bore Davidson, with his everlasting plans of
battles, gets here, so we had better make the most of our time."  He
stirred the fire, and then seated himself close to his niece.  He
looked at her nervously, and several times opened his mouth as if to
speak, but always seemed to think better of it before he had made a
sound.

"Why, what on earth is the matter?" cried Miss Travers, staring with
wide eyes.

Mr. Pollin braced himself, and swallowed hard.  "My dear," he said,
"I want to confess that I promised your mother that I would speak to
you about--about--"

"About what, uncle?"  She breathed fast, and her face was anxious.

"Dash it all, about some silly rot!" cried the old gentleman, "and,
by gad, I don't intend to mention it.  You are quite old enough to
look after your own affairs,--of that nature,--and you are much wiser
than the people who wish to look after them for you."

"I know what it is," said Molly, slowly.

"Then don't give it another thought," said Mr. Pollin.  He patted her
hand gently, and sighed with relief.  "Now we can have a cigarette,"
he said.  But his real task was yet to come.  He wanted to know, by
her own showing, if she still cared for Hemming.  How the devil was
it to be done, he wondered.  He looked at the clock, and saw that the
general was not due inside another forty minutes.  He looked at
Molly.  She leaned back in his deepest chair, looking blissfully at
home and uncommonly pretty.  Her slight, rounded figure was turned
sidewise between the padded arms of the chair, while her grave gaze
explored the book-shelves.  Between two fingers of her right hand she
held a fat cigarette, unlighted.

"What a lucky man an uncle is," he murmured.

She wrinkled her eyes at him for a moment, and then laughed softly.
"That was very prettily said; but I would much rather you read to
me--something that you are very fond of.  I'll see if I like it.
Perhaps our tastes are a good deal the same, and, if so, you will be
able to save me a lot of time and temper by telling me what to read."

"A literary adviser," suggested Mr. Pollin, as he fumbled through a
stack of magazines and papers beside his chair.

"Surely you will not find anything in the magazines," she exclaimed.

In answer, he selected one from the heap, and opened it at a marked
page.

"What is it?" she asked.

"'Pedro, the Fisherman,' is the name of it," he replied, and
straightway began to read.

It was a simple story of a small, brown boy somewhere at the other
side of the world, and yet the beauty, the humble joy, and the humble
pathos, made of it a masterpiece,--for the seeing ones.  Pollin read
it well, with sympathy in his voice and manner, but with no
extravagance of expression.  When he came to the end (it was a very
short story), he got up hurriedly and placed the magazine in his
niece's lap.

"I must see how Scanlan is getting along," he said, and left the room.

Molly sat very still, with the magazine face down upon her knee.  Her
eyes, abrim with tears, saw nothing of the glowing fire toward which
they were turned.  There was no need for her to look, to see by whom
the story was written.  Who but her old lover could touch her so with
the silent magic of printed words?  She forgot, for awhile, the
unanswered letter and the weary seasons through which she had vainly
waited for his forgiveness.  Now she saw only the exile,--the
wanderer,--and her heart bled for him.  He would be wiser than of
old, she thought, but still gentle and still fearless.  A cynic?--no,
he could never be that.  Such a heart, though embittered against one
woman, would not turn against the whole of God's world.  She had
thrown aside the love that now read and translated the sufferings and
joys of outland camps and cities.  The very tenderness that enabled
him to understand the men and women of which he wrote had once been
all for her.

The magazine slid to the floor, and a loose page, evidently cut from
some other periodical, fluttered to one side.  Molly sat up and
recovered it.  Listlessly she turned it over.  Here were verses by
Hemming.  Her tears blotted the lines as she read:


  "When the palms are black, and the stars are low, and even
      the trade-winds sleep,
  God, give my longing wings, to span the valleys and hills
      of the deep!"


And again,--


  "The sailor's voyage is a thousand miles, 'bout ship, and a
      thousand more!
  By landfall, pilot, and weed-hung wharf,--to the lass at the
      cabin door.

  "But mine!--fool heart, what a voyage is this, storm-beaten
      on every sea,
  With never the glow of an open door and a lamp on the sill
      for me?"


When Mr. Pollin returned to the library, he found his niece with her
face hidden in the cushions of the chair, weeping quietly.  He had
half-expected something unusual, but the sight of her grief made him
feel like a fool.  He picked up the magazine, and replaced it neatly
on the top of the pile.  Then he noticed the clipping containing
Hemming's verses, damp and crumpled, at her feet.  That's what did
it, he thought, and was about to recover it, too, when his attention
was diverted by the sound of wheels at his curb.

"The general," he exclaimed.

Molly sat up quickly, and mopped her eyes.  "I think I must have
fallen asleep," she said, with her face turned away from her uncle.
But he was the more confused of the two.

"Yes, my dear," he said, "but now you must dry your--I mean, wake up,
for the general is at the door."  He went to the window.  With the
tail of his eye, he saw Molly stoop, quick as a flash, pluck
something from the rug at her feet, and thrust it into the front of
her dress.  Next moment the general was announced.

The lunch was sent in from the kitchen of a famous restaurant, and
was artfully served by Scanlan.  During the first part of the meal,
the general did little but eat.  He had a surprisingly healthy
appetite for a retired British soldier of his age and rank.  Later he
talked, beginning with his little say concerning the War Office.
That institution suffered severely.

"Bless my soul! what did they need of a commission to look into the
state of affairs?" he fumed.  "I could have told them about the
rifles years ago.  Why, man, I lugged one of the useless things to
Newfoundland with me, and first day on the barrens crawled to within
sixty yards of a stag, and sniped at him steady as a church,--with my
elbow on a rock, mind you.  Off walked the stag, so I popped again.
At that, he walked a bit farther, and shook his head.  My half-breed
sniggered.  'Damn you,' I said (there were no ladies there, Miss
Travers; I never swear before women and parson's), 'make me a target,
and I'll see what's the matter with this blessed shootin'-iron.'
Sacobie fixed up a target, and we both blazed at it--turn about--all
afternoon.  Every bullet went eighteen feet to the left.  Gad, if
they had only heard me that day, they would have guessed that
something was wrong with the sightin' of their precious rifles."

Next, he held forth on military matters in general, even down to
rations and uniforms for men in the field.  "The matter with our
Tommies," he declared, "is that the poor beggars haven't wind enough
to march with, tied about as they are with a lot of idiotic straps."

Presently, much to Molly's surprise, he pushed his wine-glasses to
one side, and asked for a copy of "Where Might Is Right."

"This chap, Hemming, considering his lack of age, knows a wonderful
lot about it," he said, when he got the book in his hand.  He
fluttered the pages, and soon found a passage that seemed to please
him.  He straightway read it aloud, in ringing tones and with a grand
air.

"I call that inevitable--inevitable," he cried, glaring the while at
his host and the lady, as if looking for contradictions.

"It strikes me as remarkably true," agreed Mr. Pollin.  Molly said
nothing, but something of the inner glow of pride must have shone in
her face, for her uncle glanced at her, and smiled knowingly.

The general left shortly after lunch, for he was a man of
affairs,--mostly other people's.

"I must go now," said Molly.  "Mother will be wondering what you have
done with me."

Mr. Pollin took both her hands between his, and pressed them warmly.

"Do you love Bert Hemming?" he asked.

She turned her face away, and did not answer.  But he felt her hands
tremble in his, and saw the red glow on neck and cheek.

"Bring him back," he said.  "If you love him, why ruin your own life
as well as his?"

"I wrote to him--long ago--and he--he took no notice," whispered
Molly.

"And you never wrote again?" inquired her uncle.

"Why should I?  He despises me,--or he would have answered that
letter.  I--I dragged my heart before him," she sobbed.

Mr. Pollin let go her hands, and slipped one arm around her shoulders.

"My dear little girl," he replied, "letters have been known to go
astray,--just as conclusions have."  He patted her bowed head with
his free hand.  "Why, once I lost a letter with a money order in it,"
he added, seriously.

Molly brushed away her tears.  "I must go now," she said, moving away
from him.  She put up her hands to straighten her hair.  Then a
sudden thought occurred to her, and she plucked Mr. Pollin's sleeve.

"Uncle, we must both forget about to-day," she said.

"Not I," he replied.  "I am going to write--"

He stopped short, spellbound by her sudden change of countenance and
manner.  Her eyes fairly flamed.  Her whole body trembled.

"You would not dare!" she cried.  "Oh, you would not dare!  Are you,
too, nothing but a busybody?"

Poor old Pollin gasped.

"Good Lord!  I meant it for the best," he exclaimed, weakly, "but
just as you say, my dear."

He took her home, and, by the time her door was reached, her manner
toward him had again warmed.

"It was a charming lunch," she said, as they shook hands.

Mr. Pollin sat at his writing-table, and dipped his pen in the ink,
only to dot lines on his blotter.

"The girl was right," he said, "I don't dare."

He lit a cigarette, and for several minutes contemplated wreaths of
smoke, without moving.  Suddenly he leaned forward, took a fresh dip
of ink, and scribbled:


"DEAR BERT:--You are a fool to stay away,--unless, perhaps, you no
longer care for the girl."


Without adding his signature to this offhand communication, he
enclosed it in an envelope, and addressed the same to Hemming, care
of his New York publishers.




CHAPTER VII.

  HEMMING RECEIVES HIS SAILING ORDERS FROM A
  MASTER NOT TO BE DENIED

Stanley was taken to a private lunatic asylum, and, for all we know
to the contrary, his seafaring friend went along with him.  Hemming
and Tarmont looked through his papers, and found that his father was
living (and living well, too) in Toronto, Canada.  He was a judge of
the Supreme Court, no less.  They wrote to this personage, stating
the crazy man's case, and in reply received a letter containing a
request to enter the patient at a private asylum, and a substantial
check.  The judge wrote that he had not seen or heard from his son
for seven years, and, though he had always been willing to supply him
with money, had been unable to discover his address.  He arrived in
New York soon after his letter,--a big, kindly man with white hair
and red cheeks, and a month later took his son home with him.  That
was the last Hemming saw or heard of Stanley,--of the man to whom he
owed more than he had knowledge of.

O'Rourke's affairs went along merrily.  He wrote and sold stories and
poems.  His name began to appear each month on the cover of a certain
widely read magazine.  Everything was in line for an early wedding
and a career of happiness "for ever after."

One morning, while O'Rourke was hard at work, Hemming, who had gone
out immediately after breakfast, returned to their sitting-room and
laid a red leather case on his friend's manuscript.  O'Rourke
completed a flowing sentence, and then straightened up and opened the
case.  A very fine brier-root pipe was disclosed to his view.

"Where did you steal this?" he inquired.

"It is a present for you," said Hemming, dropping into a chair.
O'Rourke put down his pen, and eyed his friend with an air of
surprise.

"A present!" he exclaimed.  "Why, my dear chap, surely I've been
taking anything of yours that I happened to want long enough for you
to see that there is no need of this depressing formality."

"But we've been such chums."

"You haven't just found that out, I hope."

Hemming shook his head.

"I'm going away," he explained, "and I suppose it will be without you
this time."

"I wouldn't mind going to Staten Island," replied O'Rourke, "but for
any farther than that you will have to mark me out."

"I sail for England to-morrow," Hemming informed him.

"Have you been--have you received a letter, or anything of that
kind?" inquired his comrade.

"No, but Stanley told me I was a fool not to go back."

"Could have told you that myself."

"Then why didn't you?"

"Thought you knew it."

"I didn't know it,--and I am not sure, even now," retorted Hemming.

"Well, old man," rejoined O'Rourke, "you know her better than I do,
so suit yourself.  But my advice is the same as Stanley's."

He stared moodily at the Englishman.  In fact, he was already lonely
for his energetic, steel-true roommate.  What days and nights they
had seen together!  What adventures they had sped, knee to knee!
What vigils they had kept by the camp-fires and under the
cabin-lamps!  And now a girl!--but at that thought his brow cleared.

"I think we have both done with the old pace," he remarked, pensively.

"I wonder," said Hemming.

That night about a dozen men gathered in Tarmont's studio.  Hemming
was the guest of honour.  The big room was soon filled with smoke.
There were many things to drink and a few things to eat.  Songs were
sung, and stories told.  Hemming tried to make a speech, and O'Rourke
had to finish it for him.  After that, Tarmont suggested leap-frog.

"Just wait until I do my little stunt," begged Potts.  He tuned his
banjo, and, to an accompaniment of his own composing, sang the
following verses:


  "'You may light your lamps to cheer me,
    You may tune your harps for me,
  But my heart is with my shipmates
    Where the lights are on the sea.

  "'You may wine me, you may dine me,
    You may pledge me to the brim,
  But my heart is pledging Charlie,
    And you have no thought of him.

  "'You may cheer me with your friendship,
    As you are gentlemen,
  But the friend I want the hand-grip of
    Is not within your ken.

  "'So keep your praise, and keep your blame,
    And save your good red wine,
  For though this town be home for you,
    It is no home of mine.

  "'And when your lights are brightest,
    Ah, then, across the glare,
  I pledge my friends of yesterday,
    And love of otherwhere.'"


The applause was loud and long.  They patted the singer on the back,
and thumped him on the chest.  They gave him three cheers and a drink
(which made more than three drinks).  O'Rourke shouted for their
attention.

"All Potts did was make up the silly tune," he cried.  "I wrote the
verses--with my little pen."

When Hemming and O'Rourke got back to their rooms, they found a
steamer-trunk and a couple of bags packed and strapped, and Smith
snug abed.  The time was 2.30 A.M.  They lit the fire, changed their
coats, and drew their chairs to the hearth.  O'Rourke placed a
decanter and glasses on the corner of the table.  They talked a
little in murmured, disjointed sentences.  Each followed his own
thoughts as they harked back to the past and worked into the future.
They sipped their Scotch and soda, with meditative eyes on the fire.
O'Rourke sighed.  "Thank God, Helen likes New York no better than I
do," he said.

Hemming looked up and nodded.

"My boy," he said, gravely, "if I ever find you and Helen blinking
out such a stupid existence as the thing some of our friends call
life, I'll drop you both."

"No danger of that," laughed O'Rourke, happily.

"Remember the Hickses," warned Hemming.

For long after O'Rourke had turned in, Hemming continued his musings
by the sinking fire.  Just as the dawn gleamed blue between the
curtains, he lit a candle, and unrolled the final proof-sheets of his
novel.  By the time these were corrected to his satisfaction, the
room was flooded with sunshine, and Smith was astir.




CHAPTER VIII.

HEMMING WOULD PUT HIS DREAMS TO THE PROOF

On arriving in London, Hemming went straight to the Portland Hotel.
As soon as Smith had unpacked enough of his things to allow him to
dress, he chartered a cab and hastened toward his old haunts.  It was
close upon seven o'clock; the night falling black with an upper fog,
and the streets alive with the red and white lights on either hand,
and the golden eyes of the hansoms.  At his old club in Piccadilly he
loitered for awhile on the lookout for familiar faces, and wondering
where he could find Anderson.  His courage, which had often failed
altogether during the voyage--especially in the early mornings--was
now at its height.  In this brave mood he felt quite sure that all
those lonely years had been nothing but a frightful, foolish mistake.
He wanted to talk it over with Anderson.  His old friend would give
him some tips as to how the land lay, and what obstacles to look out
for.  From a waiter, he learned that Major Anderson was then in town,
and frequented this club, so, leaving a note for him, he went on foot
to Piccadilly Circus.  At the Trocadero, he found a quiet table, and
ordered a quiet dinner.  As he waited, he watched the people in the
place with happy interest.  They came, as he had so often seen them
come there before, these men and women in evening dress, laughing and
whispering, but now talking of a hundred things to which he was a
stranger.  The waiters slid about grave and attentive as of old.  The
women pulled at their gloves, and glanced about them, and more than
once Hemming bore, undisturbed, the scrutiny of fair and questioning
eyes.  But throughout the dinner, he had some difficulty in curbing
his impatience.  He was keen to put this dream of his to the test;
and yet, with the thought of going to her and looking into her eyes
for what his heart so valiantly promised him, came always the memory
of that last parting.  Her injustice had burned deep, but still more
painful was the recollection of her brief show of relenting,--for
then he had turned away.

Still in a brown study, he sipped his coffee and inhaled his
cigarette.  Visions from the days of his old happiness came to him,
and his hand trembled as it never had in anger or fatigue.  He built
dreams of the wonderful meeting.  Would her eyes lighten as Helen
Hudson's had when O'Rourke returned from his exile?

Some one touched his elbow.  He started up, and beheld Anderson.

Though the major said the usual things, and shook hands with extreme
cordiality, Hemming noticed a tinge of reserve in the greeting.

"This _is_ a surprise," stammered Anderson, examining the tip of his
cigar with an exhibition of interest that seemed to the other quite
uncalled for.

"You don't think it is loaded, do you?" inquired Hemming, smiling
patiently.

"Loaded!" exclaimed the major, with a start; "oh,--the cigar.  Ha,
ha."

Hemming's smile became strangely fixed, as he surveyed his friend
across the little table.  Could this be the same old Anderson, he
mused; and, if so, why so confoundedly chesty?  Could it be that a
staff appointment had come his way?  He gave up the riddle, and
related some of his adventures in Pernamba, and told of the end of
Penthouse's misguided career.

"I saw something about the revolution and your heroism in the New
York papers," said Anderson, "but there was no mention of Penthouse."

"He called himself Cuddlehead at that time,--and really it was hardly
worth while enlightening the press on that point," replied Hemming.
"He was related to Mrs. Travers," he added.

The major moved uneasily in his chair.

"By the way," continued Hemming, with a poor attempt at a casual air,
"how are Mrs. Travers and Molly?"

"I believe they are very well," replied his friend.

"See here, Dick," cried the man of adventures, with a vast change of
manner, "I must show my hand.  Why should I try to bluff you, anyway?
Tell me, old chap, do you think I have half a chance."

The colour faded from the major's ruddy cheeks, and he looked forlorn
and pathetic, despite his swagger and size.

"Half a chance," he repeated, vaguely,--"half a chance at what?"

"You used to know well enough," cried the other.  "Damn it, are my
affairs so soon forgotten?"

"I thought you had forgotten them yourself.  It is a long time since
you went away, you know," replied Anderson, scarcely above a whisper.
Drops of sweat glistened on his face.

"A long time,--yes, I know," murmured Hemming.

Presently he said: "Dick, you have not answered my question."

Anderson cleared his throat, fingered his moustache, and glanced
about uneasily.  But he made no reply.

"You don't think I have any chance?  You think she does not care for
me?" questioned Hemming, desperately.

He reached over and gripped his friend's wrist with painful vim.
"Tell me the truth, Dick, and never mind my feelings," he cried.

Anderson withdrew his arm with a jerk.

"Can't you see?  Are you such a damn fool!" he muttered.  "You come
along, after you have had your fun, and expect me to produce the
joyous bride,--the blushing first-love."

"What the devil is the matter with you?" asked Hemming, aghast.

"So you imagine the world stands still for you,--Mr.
Commander-in-Chief?  You had better hurry back to your nigger troops,
or they'll be having another revolution."

Hemming looked and listened, and could believe neither his eyes nor
his ears.  Was this the same man who, once upon a time, had been his
jolly, kindly friend?  The once honest face now looked violent and
mean.  The once honest voice rang like a jealous hag's.  Hemming
stared, and stared, in pained astonishment.  Then, by some flutter of
his companion's eyelids, understanding came to him.

"Dick," he said, "Dick, I am sorry."

By this time Anderson looked thoroughly ashamed of himself.  "For
God's sake, Bert, get out and leave me alone," he cried, huskily.
"I've been drinking too much, you know."

Without another word, Hemming paid his bill and left the place.
Beyond the fact that Anderson was in love with Molly, he did not know
what to make of that honest soldier's behaviour.  Perhaps Molly loved
Anderson, and Anderson was too loyal to his old friend to further his
own suit?  That would make the mildest man act like a drunken collier.

Hemming had been striding along at a brisk pace, but, when this idea
got hold of him, he turned in his tracks and went back to the
Trocadero, eager to tell his friend to go ahead and win the happiness
in store for him.  But when he reached the place, one of the waiters
informed him that Major Anderson had gone.  He immediately returned
to the club.  By this time, he had made up his mind to write to Miss
Travers, and say good-bye--for ever.  On the club stationery he wrote:


"DEAR MOLLY:--My dreams have brought me back to England, and almost
to you.  But I met Anderson a little while ago, and you will
understand why I do not call on you now.  It was foolish of me to
hope,--but I am afraid I have been a great many kinds of a fool
during my aimless life.  I intend leaving town in a day or two, and
returning to one or other of my distant stamping-grounds.  Please
think kindly of me, for 'old sake's sake.'  I wish you all the
happiness life and love can give.

    "As ever,
        H.H."


He gave the letter to a page, to be immediately posted, and then sat
down in a deserted corner and pretended to read.  His thoughts were
in a turmoil, and his heart ached dully.  It seemed to him that fate
was pressing him beyond human endurance.  His gloomy meditations were
interrupted by a genial voice addressing him by his Christian name,
and, looking up, he found Mr. Pollin at his elbow.

"You are prompt, my boy," remarked Mr. Pollin.

Hemming frowned.  What did the old ass mean by saying he was prompt,
he wondered.

"I got to town to-day," he replied, coldly.

Pollin pursed his lips and wrinkled his brow.  "Let me see,--ten,
eleven, twelve,--why, that is very quick work.  I mailed the note
only twelve days ago," he said.

"What note? and what are you talking about?" asked his bewildered
hearer.

"The note to you."

"I did not get any note."

"Then what the devil brought you here?"

"That is my own business, sir," retorted Hemming, angrily.

"Easy, easy, Herbert," cried the old man.

"I beg your pardon, sir, for speaking to you like that," replied
Hemming, "but I am in a nasty temper to-night, and I really can't
make out what you are driving at."

"Granted, my dear boy; granted with a heart and a half," exclaimed
Pollin.  "But tell me," he asked, "do you mean to say that my note,
advising you to come to London, never reached you?"

"That is what I mean to say," Hemming assured him.  Suddenly his face
brightened, and he leaned forward.  "Why did you advise me to come to
London?" he asked.

Mr. Pollin surveyed him critically.  "We'll just sit down and have a
drink," he said, "and then maybe I will tell you."

Hemming's curiosity was sufficiently excited to prompt him to comply
with this suggestion.  He wondered what old Pollin could have to say
to him, for they had never seen much of each other, nor had they been
particularly friendly.  But he was Molly's uncle,--there lay the
golden possibility.  He smothered the thought.  More likely, the
communication would be something about Anderson's prospects.  He
smiled grimly, and swallowed half his whiskey at a gulp.

Mr. Pollin settled himself more comfortably in his chair.  "I like
your work," he began, "and have always followed it carefully.  Your
Turko-Grecian book strikes me as a particularly fine achievement.
What little of your fiction and verse I manage to hunt out in the
magazines appeals to me in more ways than one.  It is good work.  But
even better than that, I like the good heart I see behind it.  When,
a few days ago, Mrs. Travers asked me to protest with her daughter
for refusing eligible suitors, I felt it my duty to look into the
case,--hers and yours.  I did so, and came to the conclusion that she
still cares for you more than for any one else.  That is my reason
for writing you to come home."

"Does she know that you have written to me?" queried Hemming, his
face and heart aglow.

"No, indeed, but I'm afraid she may suspect when she sees you,"
replied Mr. Pollin, with some show of uneasiness.

"And what about Anderson?" asked Hemming.

"Dick Anderson?  Ah, he is exceedingly stupid, or he would have given
up long ago.  He never had the ghost of a chance," replied the
beaming match-maker.

Hemming stood up, and grasped the other warmly by both hands.  "I got
along without your letter," he said, "but I don't know what might
have happened by now if you'd not stumbled over me to-night.  I saw
Anderson, you know, and somehow got the idea into my head that I was
out of the game."

"Out of the game," laughed Pollin.  "No fear of that, my boy.  Come
over to my diggings, and we'll have a smoke on it."

As he led the prodigal from the club, clinging affectionately to his
arm, he warned him of Mrs. Travers.  "Don't pay any attention to
her,--unless she happens to be polite," he said.

Late that night, after Hemming had returned to his hotel, Mr. Pollin
sat up and penned a note to his niece.




CHAPTER IX.

TO PART NO MORE

  "The eyes that wept for me, a night ago,
  Are laughing now that we shall part no more."


It was later than usual when Molly awoke that morning.  It seemed to
her that the room looked brighter than it had for a long time.  The
pictures on the walls shone with a hitherto unnoticed glow.  She lay
still for awhile, recalling the night's dream, piecing the fragments
one by one.  The dream had been altogether pleasant and unusual.  She
had been in strange and delightful countries,--

      "Where below another sky
  Parrot islands anchored lie."

She had seen the palms shake their stiff foliage against the steady
winds.  She had gone along a white street, gleaming between deep
verandas, and Hemming had walked beside her, talking of his
adventures and his hopes.  She had heard surf-music drifting in from
moonlit reefs, and the tinkling of mandolins out of alleys of roses.
She had gone through a land of sweet enchantment with her lover's
hand in hers.

Molly dressed slowly, the spell of her dreaming still upon her,
haunting her like a half-remembered voice.  At the breakfast-table
she found three letters beside her plate.

"You seem to be a woman of affairs, my dear," said Mrs. Travers,
eyeing the letters greedily from her end of the table.  The dame had
finished her breakfast some time before, but, having examined the
three envelopes carefully, curiosity about their contents kept her in
her place.

When Molly saw Hemming's handwriting,--and on the stationery of a
London club at that,--she leaned back, and for the flight of a dozen
heart-beats kept her eyes tight shut, and her hands clinched on the
arms of the chair.

"My dear, what is the matter?" cried her mother, in tones of
surprised concern.  She, too, had recognized the writing, however.

"I felt dizzy--just for a moment," answered Molly.  Then she opened
the letter.  She read it again and again, making nothing of it, save
that he was in London, had come there to see her, and was going away
again.  Love of her had brought him, but why should he go away?  What
had Major Anderson to do with it?  Now her heart pulsed joy through
her veins, and now fear,--and they both hurt.  Then came the fearful,
humiliating question,--could it be that her uncle had sent for him?

"What has that shameless adventurer written to you?" asked Mrs.
Travers, purple with curiosity, and with fear that the chances for
her daughter to marry a fortune were ruined.

"What shameless adventurer?" cried Molly, looking up with flashing
eyes.

"Herbert Hemming."

"How do you know the letter is from Herbert Hemming?"

"I--I happened to notice the handwriting."

"Paul Pry," cried Molly; and with that she burst into tears.  Mrs.
Travers sailed from the room, much against her inclination, but her
dignity demanded it of her.  Left to herself, Molly stifled the sobs,
brushed the tears from her eyes, and opened the other letters.  Her
uncle's she read with wonder and delight.  It ran thus:


"DEAR NIECE:--Herbert is in town.  I ran across him at the club.  He
was in very low spirits, suspecting something between you and Major
Anderson; but I soon cheered him up.  Now is my time to confess that
I wrote to H.H. a few days ago.  Fortunately he had started for
London before receiving the letter (has not seen it yet), so there is
nothing for you to get angry at a doting uncle about.  He tells me
that never a scratch of a pen has he received from you, since the
beginning of your misunderstanding.  He means to call on you
to-morrow, at the informal hour of ten in the morning.  His happiness
is all in your hands.

  "Your loving Uncle."


Anderson's communication,--a hopeless scrawl, in which he said that
Hemming was in town, and that he himself was going to France for a
little while--only interested her in that it proved to be a key to
her lover's message.  Presently she glanced up at the clock.  "Within
half an hour," she cried, softly, and, gathering together her papers,
she left the room.

Of course Hemming was twenty minutes ahead of time.  Mr. Pollin might
have known that, under the circumstances, a lover always allows
thirty minutes for a ten-minute cab-drive.  Unfortunately, Mr.
Pollin, though an estimable man in a hundred ways, did not know
everything about a lover.  He had very seldom been one himself, even
of the mildest type.  So when Hemming, short of breath, glorious of
visage, and flushing hot and cold,--in fact, with all the worst
symptoms of a recruit going into action,--entered the long and formal
drawing-room, he was received by Mrs. Travers.  This was a long way
from what Pollin had led him to expect.  He stood aghast; he got a
grip on himself, and, bowing low, extended his hand.  Mrs. Travers
ignored his hand.  But, for all her awe-inspiring front, she, too,
was agitated.  She knew that she was about to play a desperate game.
Fever and rum had made the Brazilian colonel's game seem feasible.
Conceit, stupidity, and love of money were her excuse for making a
fool of herself.

"Mr. Hemming, I believe," she said.

This was too colossal for Hemming.  He could not pass that, however
eager he might be to get this unexpected interview over with.  He
lifted one hand close to his face and stared at it intently for
several seconds.

"'Pon my word," he said, "I believe you are right.  May I ask if you
recognized me by my eyeglass or my feet?"  His smile was politely
inquiring.  He looked as if he really wanted to know.

"You will leave this house immediately," cried the lady, as soon as
she could command sufficient breath.  "My daughter is very wise in
deciding to have nothing to do with you."

This shot told, and his manner changed to one of haggard doubt and
dread.

[Illustration: "AT THAT MOMENT MOLLY TRIPPED INTO THE ROOM"]

Mrs. Travers saw her advantage, and, knowing that her time was
limited, hastened to follow it up.  But at that moment Molly tripped
into the room.  At sound of the light step and whispering of skirts
Hemming turned toward the door.  The old woman and all her works were
forgotten, for Molly's eyes proved the truth of his dreaming.  But he
did not approach her.  She paused on the threshold, not speaking, not
smiling, but with the whole dear secret in her radiant face.  How
long was it--seconds or centuries--that her eyes looked into his
across the furniture of that formal room?  Presently, with a little
catch in her breath, like a sob, she spoke, turning her gaze to Mrs.
Travers.

"Mother," she said, "when I tell you that I overheard your last
remark, I think you will understand and forgive the anger and--and
disdain which I feel toward you."

Mrs. Travers, suddenly grown old and ugly, moved toward the door.
She reeled, and nearly fell.  Hemming sprang forward, caught her
firmly and gently, and helped her to a couch.  By this time her great
face was dead-white, and her eyelids fluttering.  He tore open the
neck of her dress, and then ran to the dining-room for water.  This
he used upon her with a liberal hand, and soon she gasped and opened
her eyes.  Molly put her arms around her lover's neck.

"What a brute I am," she sobbed; "but--but she called you a shameless
adventurer--and she--lied to you."

Mrs. Travers completed her recovery as best she could, without
further assistance.




CHAPTER X.

A NEW COMMAND

O'Rourke sent Mr. Pollin's letter back to Hemming, and Molly
treasured it, unopened, among her dearest possessions.  Mr. Pollin
had several serious talks with his sister, but for all the good that
came of them he might have saved his breath to blow smoke with.  That
cantankerous, silly old lady, firmly believing that her daughter had
treated her unkindly, refused to have anything more to do with
Hemming.  Before a few friends as biased or stupid as herself she
posed as a Christian martyr.  What a pity there were no pagan
emperors around, with boiling oil and thumbscrews!

One morning, about three weeks after Hemming's return, he and Molly
rode together in Hyde Park.  Despite Mrs. Travers, and thanks to Mr.
Pollin's library and another friend's saddle-horses, they managed to
meet for several hours every day.  On this occasion, as they walked
their horses shoulder to shoulder, they seemed deep in some great
plan.

"I think good old Santosa has had his finger in it," said Hemming.
"You see, he married the daughter of the secretary of war not very
long ago.  Rio is a beautiful place," he continued, "and a general,
even of the Brazilian army, is not a person to be lightly treated.
Remember that, dear!"

"It will be simply glorious," cried Molly.  "But are you quite sure
that I have enough clothes, and that there is no immediate danger of
a revolution?"

"I should think one gown would be enough for one wedding," he
replied, smiling, "and as for a revolution--bah!  Brazil is as safe
as a nursery these days."

"You must promise me not to give up your writing," she said.

"I could not give it up if I tried.  I am under contract for two
novels inside the next two years," he answered.

Molly shook her head at that.  They touched their nags to a canter,
and for a little while rode in silence.

"You took your time to find out," called Molly, presently.

"I am afraid I can't make it any clearer to you," he replied.

Molly drew her horse toward his, and leaned forward in the saddle.

"Dearest boy," she said, "I can't believe that you will ever forget
how cruel I was to you, though I know that you forgave me long ago."

"The memory of it is buried somewhere in the Pernamba bush, with the
body of Penthouse," he answered, gently.

"But tell me," she began, and paused.

"Anything," he laughed back.

"Did you ever care for Marion Tetson?"

"Not even in those days--when she was really charming."


Several months later, at the house of a mutual friend, Mrs. Travers
met General Davidson.  The general beamed upon her with marked
cordiality.

"I am glad to know that some English people appreciate a good thing,"
he said.

The rest of the company turned to see what was going on, and the old
lady stared.

"I am speaking of your distinguished son-in-law, Herbert Hemming,"
continued the general, in a dress-parade voice, "and I assure you,
madam, that when he took command of the military district of Rio
Janeiro, England lost a valuable man.  It is a crying shame," he
added, glaring around, "that the English government had not Mrs.
Travers's discernment."

The dame mumbled a meaningless reply.  A curate sniggered behind his
hand.  Later Mrs. Travers cornered her hostess.

"Why didn't the ungrateful girl tell me?" she asked.

"Tell you what, my dear?"

"About that Rio Janeiro military district."

"You should have read the papers, my dear," replied her hostess,
coldly; "then, perhaps, you would not have made yourself so
ridiculous."



THE END.



GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, LD., ST. JOHN'S HOUSE, CLERKENWELL, E.C.

RAYTON:

                            _A BACKWOODS MYSTERY_

                         By THEODORE GOODRIDGE ROBERTS

    _Author of "A Captain of Raleigh's," "Comrades of the Trails," "Red
    Feathers," etc._


    _Illustrated by
    JOHN GOSS_

    _BOSTON      L. C. PAGE &
    COMPANY      MDCCCCXII_

    _Copyright, 1910, by_
    Street & Smith

    _Copyright, 1910, by_
    La Salle Publishing Company

    _Copyright, 1912, by_
    L. C. Page & Company
    (INCORPORATED)

    _All rights reserved_

    First Impression, January, 1912

    _Electrotyped and Printed by
    THE COLONIAL PRESS
    C. H. Simonds & Co., Boston, U. S. A._




[Illustration: NELL HARLEY]




CONTENTS

CHAPTER PAGE

I. THE GAME THAT WAS NOT FINISHED 1

II. JIM HARLEY TELLS AN OLD STORY 17

III. DAVID MARSH DECIDES TO SPEAK--AND DOESN'T 33

IV. THE TRAPPER'S CONFESSION 46

V. DOCTOR NASH'S SUSPICIONS--YOUNG MARSH'S MISFORTUNE 61

VI. DAVID TAKES A MISFORTUNE IN A POOR SPIRIT 76

VII. MR. BANKS TAKES A HAND IN THE GAME 91

VIII. RAYTON GOES TO BORROW A SAUCEPAN 107

IX. RAYTON CONFESSES 122

X. RED CROSSES AGAIN 138

XI. AN UNFORTUNATE MOMENT FOR THE DOCTOR 154

XII. RAYTON IS REMINDED OF THE RED CROSSES 169

XIII. CAPTAIN WIGMORE SUGGESTS AN AMAZING THING 184

XIV. FEAR FORGOTTEN--AND RECALLED 200

XV. MR. BANKS IS STUNG 215

XVI. THE LITTLE CAT AND THE BIG MOUSE 230

XVII. AN ASTONISHING DISCOVERY 245

XVIII. DICK GOODINE RETURNS UNEXPECTEDLY 260

XIX. THE CAPTAIN'S CHARGE 275

XX. THE CHOSEN INSTRUMENT OF FATE 291

XXI. THE DEATH OF THE CURSE 302

XXII. IN THE WAY OF HAPPINESS 312




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


PAGE

NELL HARLEY _Frontispiece_

"JIM HARLEY SNATCHED UP THE CARD" 5

"HE ADVANCED SLOWLY, PAINFULLY, A PITIFUL FIGURE" 72

"PLUNGED AT RAYTON, WITH HIS FISTS FLYING" 165

"'IT IS BECAUSE--BECAUSE I CARE SO FOR YOU--'" 201

"THEN HE HALTED AND RECOILED, CLUTCHING AT THE COLD WALLS!" 233




RAYTON:

A BACKWOODS MYSTERY




CHAPTER I

THE GAME THAT WAS NOT FINISHED


Samson's Mill Settlement had, for the past fifteen years, prided itself
on its absolute respectability; and then came Reginald Baynes Rayton,
with his unfailing good humor, his riding breeches, and constant
"haw-haw"--and corrupted the community. So it happened that five
representative men of the settlement, and Mr. Rayton, sat and played
poker one October night in Rayton's snug living room. They had done it
before--only last week, in fact--but the sense of guilty novelty had not
yet worn off. Only Rayton and old Wigmore were absolutely at their ease.
White beans had to do in the place of the usual chips. The standard of
play was very moderate--a one-cent _ante_ and a five-cent _limit_--but
it seemed reckless to some of those representative citizens.

"Jane questioned me pretty sharp, to-night," said Benjamin Samson, the
owner of the mill that sawed lumber and ground buckwheat for the whole
Beaver Brook valley; "but I give her a bagful of evasive answers. Yes,
sir-ee! I guess she suspicioned something. She's been kinder expectin'
me to fall from grace ever since she first married me."

"Haw-haw!" brayed Mr. Rayton. "Mrs. Samson is a clever woman. She knows
a bad egg, Benjamin, without having to break the shell."

The others chuckled.

"She ain't as smart as you think," replied Samson, awkwardly shuffling
the cards, "for at last I said to her, 'I'm goin' to see Rayton,' says
I. 'He's started a kinder lit'ry club for his male friends.' 'Then
you'll learn no harm from him,' says she, 'for I'm sure his morals is as
good as his manners. The way he lifts his hat to me is a regular treat.
_He_ knows what's my due, even if some other folks don't,' says she."

Five men, including Samson himself, roared at this; but Rayton's haw-haw
lacked, for once, its usual heartiness.

"Oh, come now," he protested shamefacedly. "It's not just the thing
to--to be making fun of a lady. Of course I raise my hat to Mrs. Samson.
Proud to do it, I'm sure; and I'm glad she appreciates it. Harley, you
are banker, I think. Pass me over fifty beans. Benjamin, when you've
finished shoveling those cards about--I don't call it shuffling--give us
a chance to cut for deal."

Jim Harley, a shrewd man of about thirty years of age, who farmed in the
summer and operated in the lumber woods, on a small but paying scale, in
the winter months, counted out beans to the company in return for
quarters and dimes. Samson shot the cards across the table, backs up,
and every one drew. Old Captain Wigmore won the deal. He brought the
cards together in a neat pile with one sweep of the hand, shuffled them
swiftly and skillfully, and dealt so fast as to keep three in the air at
once. It was a pleasure to watch him. Even Rayton was a fumbler with the
pasteboards beside him.

The six picked up their cards and looked at them, each in a way
characteristic of him. Honest Benjamin, catching sight of two kings and
feeling Doctor Nash's prying glance upon him, struggled to hide a smirk
of satisfaction that was too strong for him. Rayton beamed; but that
might mean anything. Old Wigmore's bewhiskered face expressed nothing,
as usual. The other visages showed hope or disgust as plainly as if the
words were printed across them. Discards were thrown to the centre of
the table, and Wigmore distributed others.

"What--?" queried young David Marsh, and immediately relapsed into
silence.

"What _what_?" asked Rayton.

"Oh, it will keep," replied Marsh.

"Davy wants to know if four aces are any good?" suggested the doctor,
winking at Rayton.

Benjamin Samson, torn with doubt, ventured three beans on the chances of
his pair of kings. That started things briskly; but on the second round
David Marsh went the limit. That brought things to a standstill, and the
pool went to David without a challenge; but he showed his cards for all
that.

"What I want to know is, who's marked this six of clubs?" he asked.
"That's what I began to ask, a minute back," he added, looking at Doctor
Nash.

"Four of a kind," murmured Samson enviously.

"But look at the six of clubs," urged Marsh. "Look at the two red
crosses in the middle of it, will you!"

All got to their feet and stared down at the card.

"What's it for?" demanded David Marsh. "If it was marked on the back,
now, it might be of some use. I've heard of such things."

"The marks weren't there last night," said Rayton, "for I was playing
patience with this very pack and would have seen them."

At that moment Jim Harley snatched up the card and held it close to his
eyes. "Hell!" he exclaimed. "The red crosses!"

[Illustration: "JIM HARLEY SNATCHED UP THE CARD"]

They gazed at him in astonishment, and saw that his face was colorless
under the tan. The stout, excitable Benjamin laughed hysterically and
fingered a pocket of his curving vest to make sure that his watch was
still there. He felt very uneasy; but perhaps Jim was only playing a
trick on them? That was not like Jim--but who can say what a man may not
do who has fallen to poker playing? Old Captain Wigmore shared this
suspicion evidently.

"Very amusing, James," he said. "You would have made a first-rate actor.
But suppose we go on with the game. Have you another deck,
Reginald--one that our smart young friend has not had a chance to monkey
with?"

"Do you mean that I marked this one?" cried Harley. "What the devil
would I do that for? Why, you--you old idiot, I'd sooner break my leg
than see----But what's the good of talkin'?"

Old Wigmore sighed patiently, sat down, and began to fill his pipe. The
others stared at Jim Harley in amazed consternation. They saw that he
was not joking and so thought that he had suddenly become insane.

"Yes, I quite agree with you, Jim," said Doctor Nash soothingly.
"Captain Wigmore is an old idiot, beyond a doubt, and it is a most
remarkable thing that the card should be marked with two red crosses.
Sit down and tell me all about it, like a good fellow."

"You go chase yourself, doc," returned the other unpleasantly. "You
think I'm off my nut, I guess; but I'm saner than _you_ are--by a long
sight."

"I never knew you to act so queer before, Jim," complained Benjamin
Samson. "You give me the twists, you do. Wish I'd stayed home, after
all. This card playin' ain't healthy, I guess."

"Have a drink, Jim. Something has upset you," said Rayton.

Harley accepted a glass of whisky and water. Then he sat down and again
examined the six of clubs, the others watching him keenly.

"Oh, of course it's all foolishness!" he exclaimed. "But it gave me a
turn, I must say--and it being dealt to Dave, and all that. Looked
queer, for a minute, I must say. But I guess Mr. Rayton just marked it
with red ink and forgot all about it."

Rayton shook his head. "Sorry," he replied, "but there's not a drop of
red ink in the house."

"Then some one else did it," said Harley. "It just _happened_, that's
all. No good in talking about it! Go on with the game, boys. I'll just
go home and get to bed."

"No, you don't, my son," cried Doctor Nash. "You'll just sit where you
are and tell us what all this rot is about. You've interrupted our game,
and now you have to explain things. You hinted that it was strange that
the marked card should go to Davy Marsh. Now what did you mean by that?
You've got something on your mind, I'll bet a dollar."

"I'm going home," repeated Harley firmly. "Are you stepping, too, Davy?
I want to have a word with you."

"Yes, I'll come," replied Marsh. He turned to the doctor and whispered:
"Safer to have somebody along with him, I guess. He don't seem himself,
to-night."

"I'm off, too," said Samson. "I don't feel right, I can tell you. Jim,
your queer actions has upset me. Wish I'd stayed quietly at home, with
Jane, and read last week's newspaper like a respectable Christian."

"I'm stepping, too," said the doctor. "It's my duty to keep an eye on
him, Rayton," he added, in an aside to his host.

The man who had caused the disturbance went over to Rayton and shook his
hand. His tanned cheeks had not yet regained the glow of health and
vitality that was usual to them.

"I guess I've broken up your party by my foolishness," he said, "and I'm
all-fired sorry. I wasn't myself, for a minute--nor I don't feel quite
right, even now. I don't know that I'm free to explain my actions. If I
am I'll let you know just how it was, next time I see you."

"Not another word, my dear fellow," returned Rayton. "I'm sorry you have
to go, of course--but don't worry about it. And hang explaining! Don't
tell me a word you don't want to. No doubt it's a private superstition
of some kind--or something of that sort. Why, there was my poor old
pater--and he was a parson--always got into a funk if three rooks
perched on top of his hat--or something of that kind. So I understand,
Jim. I'll look at the cards, next time, before we begin playing."

Reginald Baynes Rayton did not often say so much in one burst. It cost
him a serious effort.

"I believe you _do_ understand," said Harley gratefully. "You've shot
mighty close to the mark, anyhow. I guess you're smarter than some
people give you credit for, Mr. Rayton."

It was not until four of his guests had been sped into the night with
kindly words, that Rayton realized Jim Harley's tactless but well-meant
remark.

"Hah-hah!" he laughed. "That was too bad. Hah-hah!"

"What are you braying about, now, Reginald?" asked old Wigmore, who
still sat at the table, smoking his pipe and gazing at the scattered
cards.

"A joke of Harley's. It was quite unintentional, I think," returned
Rayton.

The old man shot a keen glance at the other from under his shaggy
eyebrows. "Those marks on the card seemed to hit him hard," he remarked.
"I can't make it out. He is a prosperous, steady-going chap, without any
crazy notions or troubles, and very clear-headed, I have always heard.
Now, why should two red marks on the six of clubs cause him to make a
fool of himself? It was young Marsh, I believe, who had the card dealt
to him."

"Yes, David Marsh got the card," replied Rayton.

"Then why didn't he raise a row, if there's anything terrible in those
marks?"

"It did not mean anything to him, evidently; but I'd swear it did to
Harley. I've heard of such things at home in England. I don't take any
stock in them myself."

"Neither do I. But it's queer that the marks should have been there."

"Yes," said Rayton, and stepped over to the table.

"You needn't look for the card," said the old man. "Nash took it away
with him. Last fall he tracked a moose across a plowed field, and he has
considered himself something of a detective ever since."

The young Englishman laughed with a preoccupied note. He stood in front
of the open stove, warming the seat of his London-cut breeches.

"It is queer that those marks should be there," he said, "but it is
still queerer that they should put Harley in such a wax. Suppose _I_ had
put the crosses there, for instance--well, the thing would be just as
queer, wouldn't it? A knowledge of how the marks got on the card would
not explain Harley's behavior."

"You are right," returned the old man dryly. "And Harley was right, too,
when he said that you are not such a fool as the people of Samson's Mill
Settlement think you."

Rayton laughed frankly.

"You spoke of not having a drop of red ink in the house; but you did not
mention--to me, at least--a drop of anything else," continued the other.

"I beg your pardon!" exclaimed Rayton. "This mystery has quite muddled
me. I'm awfully sorry, really."

He bustled about and placed a bottle of whisky, a jug of fresh water,
and two glasses on the table.

"Don't apologize, Reginald," said Wigmore, with a thin smile. "It is not
often you forget to offer hospitality. The fact is, you are a bit too
hospitable. You'll be giving away the clothes off your back next--even
those elegant looking pants, perhaps."

"Oh, come now!" remonstrated the younger man, pulling at his
straw-colored mustache, and grinning sheepishly.

"You must have a pot of money, Reginald," said the other.

"Heavens! No!"

"Then why did you give all that tea and sugar to that old squaw, Molly
Canadian--and two barrels of potatoes to Frank Gorman?"

"How do you know that?" cried Rayton, astonished.

The captain helped himself to whisky. "I keep my eyes about me," he said
complacently. "I know pretty much everything that goes on 'round this
settlement."

"Then I wish you knew the secret of Jim Harley's queer behavior
to-night--and how that card came to be marked," replied Rayton.

The old man laughed aloud--a thing that was rare with him. "That is
asking too much," he said. "I'm not a wizard, Reginald. But I venture to
say that, if I gave my mind to it, I'd have the mystery entirely solved
before that Smart Alec of a Nash has so much as picked up the right
scent."

"I quite believe you," returned Rayton. "Do you know, captain," he
added, smiling frankly, "I wonder at your living in this place. You seem
to be--if you'll pardon my saying it--of quite another world than these
simple people."

"And what about you, Reginald?"

"Oh, I'm just an ordinary chap. Came out here to farm--and here I am.
All this suits me to the tick--working in the fields, fishing, feeding
cattle, and moose shooting. But you are not a farmer, and why you should
have selected Samson's Mill Settlement to live in, after the life you
must have lived, beats me. You have no relations here. I can't
understand it, captain."

Old Wigmore got to his feet, his gray beard aquiver with anger. "Really,
sir," he cried, "what business is it of yours where I choose to live?
Damn it all!--really, I did not expect you, at least, of prying into my
affairs. Where are my hat and coat? Thanks for your whisky--which might
be better--and good night to you."

"Oh, I say! Don't go, captain!" cried the good-natured Rayton; but the
old man had already stepped briskly from the room. In another moment,
the door banged behind him.

"Now that's too bad, really," soliloquized the Englishman. "Gad! I
wouldn't have offended him, intentionally, for fifty dollars. But he is
a cranky old Johnny, I must say."

He filled his pipe, cleared the cards from the table, and sat down
before the crackling stove. Old Wigmore's show of temper soon gave way,
in his mind, to the more startling and mysterious events of the evening.
The marks on the card were strange enough; but the way in which the
sight of those marks had affected Jim Harley was altogether
extraordinary. It was not what he would have expected from Harley--or
from any one in the settlement, for that matter. The incident smacked of
the Wild West of fiction rather than of the real backwoods of New
Brunswick. And Harley was such a sensible fellow, too; hard-working,
prosperous, with a fine wife, two children, and such a delightful
sister. Yes, a charming sister! And yet he had flown clean off the
handle at sight of two little red marks on the face of the six of clubs.
Really, it was preposterous! Idiotic! Perhaps the poor chap was ill--on
the verge of a nervous breakdown from overwork? Or perhaps some silly
old superstition was to blame for the distressing incident?

"Well, it beats me to a standstill," he murmured, at last; "but I think
Jim Harley will feel like a fool when he wakes up to-morrow morning and
remembers what an ass he has made of himself. I hope the other fellows
have kept him from making a scene at home and frightening that fine
little sister of his--or his wife, either, of course."

Then Mr. Rayton closed the drafts of the stove, fastened doors and
windows, and went upstairs to bed.

In the meantime, Jim Harley had walked up and down the country roads for
an hour and a half before he had convinced Doctor Nash and Benjamin
Samson that he was not insane, not feverish, and not to be forced into
an explanation of his remarkable behavior at Rayton's. They went off to
their homes at last, Samson disheartened, Nash sarcastic. Then Harley
turned to young David Marsh.

"Davy," he said, "I don't want you to think I have gone cracked in the
upper story; but I can't tell you, just now, why I've been acting so
queer to-night. I got a scare--but I guess there's nothing to it.
Anyhow, I want you to keep clear of my place for a day or two--to keep
clear of Nell."

"What's that!" exclaimed Marsh indignantly. "Keep clear of your place,
is it? What the devil is the matter with me--or with you? You think I
ain't good enough for your sister, do you--because you've got some money
and I haven't. Damn your place!"




CHAPTER II

JIM HARLEY TELLS AN OLD STORY


Jim Harley groaned. "Davy, you are all wrong," he said gloomily.
"Hang it all, man, don't be a fool! Don't go and make things worse
for me. I don't know just how Nell feels for you, but I like you
first-rate--pretty near as well as any young fellow I've ever met.
But--but it's for your own good, Davy. It's about that card going to
you, don't you see? That sounds crazy--but I'm not crazy."

"The card? Dang the card!" returned David. "What d'ye take me for, Jim
Harley, to try to scare me with such fool talk as that? You acted darn
well to-night, I must say; but I guess I see your game. You've invented
some sort of fairy story to try to scare me away from Nell. And so you
marked that card. Red crosses on a card! D'ye take me for a darn,
ignorant Injun or half-breed? Oh, you can't fool me! You want to catch
that hee-haw Englishman for Nell, I guess."

Harley grabbed the younger man by the shoulder with fingers like the
jaws of a fox trap for strength. "You blasted young idiot!" he cried,
his voice trembling with anger. "D'ye think I'd take the trouble to
monkey with cards, and all that sort of tommyrot, if I wanted to scare
you away from my sister? No, David Marsh, I'd just tell you to keep
clear--and if you didn't I'd knock the stuffin' out of you. I guess you
know me well enough to believe _that_."

"I don't know what to believe," returned David sulkily, "except that
you're actin' more like a darn, crazy half-breed than a white man,
to-night. Let go my shoulder, anyhow, or maybe you'll learn that two can
play at that game."

Jim loosed his grip, and let his arm fall to his side. For a full minute
they faced each other in silence in the chill half dark of the October
night, there on the desolate backwoods road. David Marsh broke the
silence.

"I don't want to fight with you, Jim," he said, "but--but I must say
this talk of yours about that confounded card, and the way you are
actin' to-night, and--and what you just said about Nell--makes me mad as
a bobcat. If you can tell me what it is you're drivin' at, for Heaven's
sake tell me quick! I don't want to think you've gone nutty, Jim, and
no more do I want to think--to think----"

"What?" asked Harley sharply.

"That you're a liar."

"If you think that, you'd better keep it to yourself!"

"Well, then, I don't think it. But, jumpin' Moses, I must think
_something_!"

"I've asked you to keep away from my house, and my sister," returned
Harley, "so perhaps I had better explain things to you, as well as I
can. Then you can judge for yourself if I'm doing right or not. You'll
laugh, I guess--and maybe I'll laugh myself, to-morrow morning. But,
first of all, Davy, you must give me your word to keep what I tell you
to yourself. Maybe I'll have to tell it to Rayton, if Nell don't object,
because of the row I kicked up in his house. That would be only polite,
I suppose."

"I'll keep quiet, Jim."

"Let's walk along, to keep warm," said Harley. "It's a long story, Davy,
and I guess you'll think it a mighty foolish one."

"Fire away," returned Marsh. "Foolishness is in the air to-night, I
reckon."

"Well," began the other slowly, "it starts with my mother's mother.
That's kind of a long jump backward, but it can't be helped. It's the
way it was told to me. My mother's mother was a pretty fine young woman,
I guess, and her parents weren't just the common run--they came from
Boston and settled in St. John about the time George Washington got up
and hit the other George that smack over the head which we've all read
about. Well, the girl grew up a regular beauty, to judge by the way the
young fellows carried on about her. Two men led all the others in the
running, though. One was a Spaniard, and t'other was an Englishman; and,
after a while, it looked as if the Englishman was getting along with the
girl better than the Spaniard. The Spaniard called himself a count, or
something of that kind.

"One night, at one of those parties the men used to have in those days,
after they'd all eaten and drunk about as much as they could hold, they
sat down to play cards. I don't know what the game was, but I do know
that they used to bet a horse, or a gold watch, or a few acres of land
as quick as us fellows will bet five white beans. Well, it happened that
the Spanish count and the young Englishman--he was a navy officer, I've
heard--and two more were at the same table. Pretty soon the navy
officer got a card dealt to him with _two red crosses_ marked on it. I
forgot what card it was.

"Well, they didn't make any fuss about it, and went on with the game;
but when they were thinking of going home the count got the young fellow
by the elbow and whispered something in his ear. The other men didn't
hear what it was that he whispered, but every one in the room heard the
navy officer's answer--and the lad who afterward married my mother's
mother was one of the fellows that heard it. What the Englishman yelled
was: 'That's what it means in your country, is it! The devil take you,
and your lies, and your damn monkey tricks!' Yes, that's what he yelled,
right into the count's yellow face. They drank a terrible lot of liquor
in those days. More than was good for them, I reckon."

Jim Harley paused. "It sounds like a crazy sort of yarn to be telling,"
he said apologetically.

"Go ahead," said David Marsh. "It's a fine yarn, Jim--and your folks
must have been pretty big potatoes. It's better than a book. What was it
the count whispered to the navy officer?"

"_That_ they never found out," replied Jim. "But the officer told a
friend of his--the fellow who got the girl, after all--that the Spaniard
was trying to bluff him out of the game--not out of the game of cards,
but away from the girl. Anyhow, the count up and let fly a glass of
liquor fair into the Englishman's face, just the way it's written in
stories. Then there was a rumpus, the Spaniard spitting like a cat, and
the other lad trying to smack him in the eye with his fist. But fists
weren't considered good enough to fight with, in those days, and it
wasn't polite just to pitch in when you felt like it. So they went right
out, and off to a field at the edge of the town, and fought a duel with
pistols. It was a moonlight night. It looked as if the Spanish count
fired half a second too soon--anyhow, he put a hole smash through the
Englishman's head. Well, that was too much for the other lads, drunk as
most of them were, and they went up to the count and told him that if he
wasn't out of the country before sunrise they'd hang him up by the neck
like any common murderer. So he went. And he never came back again, as
far as I ever heard."

"I guess that happened quite a while ago," said Marsh.

"Yes, a good many years ago. But I've heard that the old lady talked
about it to the day of her death."

"And who was the man she married?"

"Just my grandfather--my mother's father. He was a young lawyer, or
something of that kind."

"Well," said Marsh, with a sigh of relief, "that's nothing but ancient
history. I wouldn't believe more than half of that even if I had been
taught it in school, out of a book. If that's all you've got to say
against the red crosses then they don't worry me a mite. Anyway, where's
the Spanish count? You'll have to dig up a Spanish count, Jim, afore you
can get any change out of me with little red crosses on a playin' card."

"Yes, that is ancient history," replied Harley, "and I won't swear to
the truth of it. The duel is true enough, though, for my own father saw
it written down in the records. But you've not heard the whole story
yet, Davy. The real thing--the part that bothers me--is yet to come."

"By the great horn spoon!" exclaimed Marsh. "And it must be near ten
o'clock! Hurry up with the rest of it, Jim--and if it's not any worse
than what you've told I'll think you've been makin' a fool of me."

"The rest of the story is about my own father--and my own mother," said
Harley. "Nell and I don't talk about it, even to each other; and this is
the first time it's been told to any one outside the family. I'd almost
forgotten it--till I saw that card to-night. Then it jumped into my mind
like--like a flash from hell's flames."

David Marsh felt a sudden embarrassment, and quick chill at his heart.

"Maybe you'd rather not tell it, Jim," he said. "If it's anything bad
I'll take your word for it."

"It is bad enough," returned the other, "but it is not disgraceful. I
must tell it to you, Davy, and then you can think over what happened
to-night and work it out for yourself. It's only right that you should
know all that I can tell you--and then, if you think it all foolishness,
it's your own funeral."

David could not see his companion's face in the darkness, though he
fairly strained his eyes to make it out. He wet his dry lips with his
tongue. "I'm listening," he said, and forced an uneasy laugh.

"My mother lived in St. John with her parents, until she married, and
moved over to the Miramichi," began Harley. "My father's home was in St.
John, too, when he was a young fellow; but he was a sailor in those days
and so spent most of his time at sea. He was a smart lad, and no
mistake--mate of a foreign-goin' bark when he was nineteen and skipper
when he was twenty-one. His schooling had been good, and he owned some
shares in the ship, so he wasn't one of the common run of shellbacks.

"When he first met my mother he was layin' off a voyage to recover from
a dose of malarial fever that had got into his blood down in Brazil. He
saw her at a party of some kind; and, not being troubled with shyness,
he went right after her. She was a beauty, I guess, like her mother
before her--and, like her mother again, there was a whole bunch of young
fellows courting her. My father, though, was a fine, upstanding lad,
with good looks, fine manners, and a dashing way in everything he did.
So he sailed right in; but he didn't have everything all his own way, at
first.

"I've heard my mother say that, Sunday evenings, as many as six young
men would call at her father's house--and she was the only girl, mind
you. But they'd all pretend to be pleased to see each other, and there
would be singing, and piano playing, and cake and wine--yes, and the old
gent would invite one or two of them into his library to smoke his
cigars, and the old lady would talk away to the rest of them about the
grand times in St. John when she was young. Sometimes she'd tell about
how the navy officer and the Spanish count fought about her--and, of
course, she'd mention the queer marks on the card. She called it a
romantic story.

"Well, it wasn't long before my father thought he had the other fellows
beaten out, so he popped the question. My mother said 'Yes'--and so the
old people announced the engagement. They were pretty stylish, you see.
My father was all cured of his malarial fever, by this time, and ready
for sea again. About a week after my mother had given him her promise,
and only a few days before he expected to have his ship ready for a
voyage to the West Indies, he was walking home about ten o'clock in the
evening and met a bunch of his friends. They were going to have supper
at a hotel and then finish the night at card playing. Well, my father
was a light-hearted lad, with a pocketful of money and a taste for jolly
company; so he joined the gang. The game they played was whist. Suddenly
my father jumped to his feet, his face as red as fire, and tore one of
the cards into little bits and flung them on the floor.

"'You may consider that a joke--whoever did it--but it's a damn poor
joke!' he cried. He was a good man, but sometimes he got boiling mad.
Some of the lads asked him what was the trouble, and one young fellow
picked up the scraps of the torn card and found the two red crosses.
'Some one here knows what the trouble is,' yelled my father, 'and if
he'll just stand up and confess to his ungentlemanly joke, I'll smack
him across the face for his trouble.'

"Nobody stood up, you may bet your hat on that; but when the lad who had
picked up the scraps of card began handing them around, a lot of them
began to laugh and jeer, and make fun of the sailor. Most of them had
heard the old lady tell about the Spanish count, you know. 'Better make
your will,' said one. 'That's a dangerous family to monkey with,' said
another. 'Glad I'm not in your boots.' 'It's the Spaniard's ghost.'
'Better break it off, Tom, and look 'round for a safer wife.' 'The other
chap who got the red marks was a sailor, too.'

"And so they shouted things at him until he was mad enough to kill
somebody. But he couldn't tackle them all. So he called them a lot of
hard names. He told them that the sailors aboard his ship had a better
idea of a joke and better manners than they had. They began to quiet
down, then, and some of them looked mighty red in the face, for every
lad there considered himself something pretty extra when it came to
style and manners. My father finished by saying that the trick they had
played and the things they had said to him were insults to two ladies
who had never done any of them a shadow of harm. Most of them jumped up
and yelled that they knew nothing about any trick, and hadn't meant to
insult any one; but my father just glared and sneered at them, and left
the room. He was just a skipper of a sailing ship, but he had been
brought up with pretty strict notions about manners, and insults, and
those kinds of things.

"He had just reached the street when one of the others--a lad called
Jackson--came jumping after him and grabbed him by the back of the neck.
This Jackson was as white as paper, he was that mad. 'I'll teach you
your proper place, you damn fo'castle swine!' he yelled, striking my
father in the face with his free hand. Well, my father jerked himself
clear and give him one on the jaw that put him to sleep for an hour or
two."

At this, Harley halted in his talk, and his walk, at one and the same
moment, and began to cut tobacco for his pipe.

"Go ahead!" exclaimed young Marsh.

"Well, all that row was kept quiet," continued Harley. "My father sailed
away--and then came a report that pieces of the wreck of his ship had
gone ashore on the Bahamas. Then people who knew about the marked card
began to talk. It looked as if what the Spanish count had said, in the
old days--or what people supposed he had said--had some truth in it. His
girl--she who was afterward my mother--nearly went crazy. Then, one fine
day, my father turned up, sound as a bell--the only survivor of the
wreck of his ship. He got his share of the underwriter's money, and
invested it in a one-third interest in another and smaller vessel. He
had no trouble in getting the job of skipper of her; but he had plenty
of trouble with his sweetheart and her parents, for they were all sure
that the red crosses were really the marks of the devil and had caused
the loss of his ship. My father laughed at them; and well he might,
since his ship had gone down in a hurricane that had wrecked half a
dozen other vessels, and he was the only man to be saved from all his
crew. 'If the devil had anything to do with it,' he said, 'he certainly
made a mess of it.' But it took him a whole week to calm them down and
get the girl's promise to marry him on his return from his next voyage.

"On the very night before he was to sail, when he was on his way to the
ship from saying good-by to my mother and the old people, a man sprang
out from behind a pile of lumber on one of the wharves, and struck at
him; but my father jumped back in time and struck in return with a
loaded stick which he carried. The man let a yelp of pain out of him,
and ran up the wharf to the dark streets of the city. My father struck a
light and presently found something that he had heard drop on the planks
when the fellow yelped--a long knife with a point sharp as a needle.

"He went aboard his ship, wrote a letter, packed up the knife in a box,
and first thing in the morning sent both letter and knife ashore to a
magistrate. Then he sailed away. He returned after three months, with a
cargo of sugar and molasses--and his left arm in a sling. He had been
stabbed, one night, in Bridgetown, Barbados. That was a thing that did
not often happen in Barbados.

"Immediately upon his return, he made quiet inquiries for young Mr.
Jackson. But Jackson had gone away, months before. There had been some
talk about the police going to look for Jackson too, just about the time
my father had sailed away. My father never gave the red crosses two
thoughts; but he often remembered the look in Jackson's face that night
they had fought in the street after the game of cards.

"Well, they married, and my father gave up the sea, moved to the mouth
of the Miramichi, and started shipbuilding. That was on my mother's
account. He did a good business, and they were happy. I was their first
child. Five years later, Nell came. About six months after that an
envelope was left at the house for him by a poor old half-witted
character in the town, who had once been a sailor. When my father came
home from the office he opened the envelope--and out fell a blue-backed
playing card onto the carpet. My mother went into a dead faint, without
waiting to see the face of it. When my father turned it over, there were
the two red crosses!"

"Did they catch Jackson?" asked David Marsh.

"No," returned Harley. "My father ran out of the house, maybe to find
the poor half-wit who had brought it to him, and he was shot dead within
ten yards of his own door."

"By Jackson?" cried David, in a husky voice.

"It must have been. No one was caught. The shock killed my mother. That
is the story, Davy. There wasn't much money for Nell and me, by the time
I was old enough to notice things--and we came here, as you know, nine
years ago."

"But--who'd want to play the old trick on me?" asked Marsh anxiously.
"And who is there here that knows anything about it? Jackson? What would
_he_ care about Nell and me?"

"Some rival, perhaps," suggested Harley. "The devil only knows! Perhaps
some one who dislikes you knows the old story; but--don't ask me," he
added nervously.

"There is Dick Goodine, the trapper," said Marsh. "He is sweet on Nell.
But what does he know--and how could he do it? Hell! Jim, it beats me!"




CHAPTER III

DAVID MARSH DECIDES TO SPEAK--AND DOESN'T


Jim Harley decided, before morning, that he must tell the tragic story
to Rayton. He also decided that there was no need, at present, of
telling either Nell or his wife of the mysterious advent of the two red
marks into Samson's Mill Settlement.

Young David Marsh spent a restless night, going over and over all that
Jim had told him. He came to the conclusion, at last, that the red
crosses themselves were harmless, and utterly foolish, and that the real
danger and tragedy lay in the human fate that had always inspired their
appearance. Then his active mind quested far and near in search of an
enemy of his own to correspond with the Spanish count of the first
tragedy, and with young Jackson of the second--and not only that, but he
must find an enemy who was in love with Nell Harley, and who knew the
story of the red crosses. He thought of every man he had ever met,
young and middle-aged; but he soon saw that this was too wide a field
to explore. He could only bring to mind one man who, to his certain
knowledge, had paid any attention to Nell Harley--and this was Dick
Goodine. Likewise, he could think of only one man in the community with
whom he was not on fairly friendly terms--and this, too, was Goodine.

Goodine had French blood in his veins, and was known to be eccentric;
but he had never been considered dangerous in any way. He was a
good-looking young woodsman who spent his summers in idleness, and his
winters in trapping furs. Sometimes he did a little business in David
Marsh's own chosen field, and guided "sports" into the wilderness after
moose and caribou. But this was not often, for Dick Goodine's pride was
even quicker than his temper. "It's not white men's work," he had said
to David, not long before, in the course of the very argument that had
caused the coolness that now existed between them. "It's Injun's
work--or nigger's. The guidin' is good enough; but when it comes to
cookin' for them, and pullin' off their wet boots at night--oh, t' hell
with it! It may suit you, but it don't suit me."

But how should Dick Goodine know anything about the story of the red
crosses, even if the state of his feelings had become sufficiently
violent to incite him to make use of them? And he had not been at
Rayton's, last night. How could he have marked the card? So David
dismissed the trapper from his mind, for the time, and turned elsewhere
for a solution of the mystery.

There was young Rayton, the Englishman. The thing had happened in his
house, and the marked card belonged to him. He was a stranger to the
settlement, for he had been only six months in the place. He seemed
honest and harmless--but that was not enough to clear him. The dazzling
smile, clear, gray eyes, and ready haw-haw might cover an unscrupulous
and vicious nature. What was known in Samson's Mill Settlement of his
past? Nothing but a few unlikely sounding anecdotes of his own telling.
He had traveled in other parts of the province, looking for a farm that
suited both his tastes and his purse, so he might very easily have heard
something of the fate of Jim Harley's father.

So far, so good! But was he in love with Nell Harley? He had shown no
signs of it, certainly; and yet if he took an interest in any young
woman in the settlement, or within ten miles of it in any direction, it
would naturally be in Nell Harley. She was well educated--and so was the
Englishman, seemingly. No one had ever denied her quiet beauty. Any one
with half an eye could see that she and Jim came of a stock that was
pretty special. That would attract the Englishman, no doubt, for he,
too, looked and talked like something extra in the way of breed. But, in
spite of all this, David had to admit to himself that he had neither
heard nor seen anything to lead him to suppose that Rayton was his
rival.

Well, who else, then? What about Doctor Nash? Nash was a bachelor, and a
great hand at making himself agreeable with the women. But David knew
that Nell did not like Nash; but, of course, a little thing like that
wouldn't bother Nash if he had taken a fancy in that direction. Yes, the
doctor might be the man. The idea was worth keeping in sight. David
could not bring any other suspect to mind. Benjamin Samson and old
Wigmore had been there when the marked card made its appearance, 'tis
true; but, in spite of his anxiety to solve the mystery, David put these
two harmless gentlemen from his thoughts with a chuckle.

At last David Marsh was on the verge of sleep when a sudden, galling
question flashed into his mind and prodded him wide awake again. Why
should anybody who might be in love with Nell Harley look upon him--upon
David Marsh--as a dangerous rival? Why, indeed! He was sweet on Nell,
there was no denying it, and had been for the past three years or more,
and no doubt there had been talk about his frequent calls at Jim's
house; but had she ever treated him as anything but just a good friend?
Not once. He was honest enough with himself to admit this, but it hurt
his vanity. And had he ever told her that he loved her? No. He had meant
to, over and over again; but, somehow, things had never seemed to be
exactly in line for the confession. The fact is, there was something in
the young woman's frank manner with him, and in the straightforward
glance of her eyes, that always made him feel that next time would do.
He had never even found sufficient courage to try to hold her hand.

"I guess she likes me, though," he murmured. "I'll go to-morrow and tell
her how I feel toward her. Yes, by thunder! I'll show the fellow who
fixed that card trick on me that I ain't scared of him--nor of her,
neither. Why should I be scared of her? I'm honest--and I'm making good
money--and Jim likes me, all right. That card trick settles it, by
ginger! I'll go and tell her to-morrow. I'll give that skunk a run for
his money, whoever he may be."

As much in the dark as ever about the mystery of the marked card, but
fully determined on his course of action as regards Miss Harley, David
Marsh fell asleep at last. His alarm clock had been set for six,
however, as he had a busy day before him; so he was soon awake again. He
sat up, grumbling, and lit the little oil lamp that stood on a chair
beside his bed. There was no turning over and going to sleep again for
him, for he had to get a load of provisions and some kit in to his camp
on Teakettle Brook before night; for he was expecting a sportsman from
the States along in a few days. From the nearer camp he would have to
portage a lot of grub across a half mile of bad trail and take it up, by
canoe, to his shack on the headwaters of Dan's River.

"I've got to hustle!" he exclaimed, and jumped courageously out of his
warm bed; but the instant his feet struck the cold floor, the queer
happenings and stories of the previous night flashed into his mind.
"Hell!" he exclaimed. "I must see Nell, I guess--but I've simply got to
get that jay of stuff in to the Teakettle by dark."

He grumbled steadily while he dressed. Dawn was breaking, and the world
outside looked depressingly cold and rough. He had a hard day before him
and a hard to-morrow after that; but he must snatch a half hour for his
interview with Nell. He shaved in cold water, with a razor that needed
honing--and this did not lighten his spirits. "The devil take that
foolishness!" he grumbled. "Why can't things leave me alone?" He went
downstairs in his sock feet, pulled on his heavy boots in the kitchen,
and lit the fire. He was a handy young fellow--as a guide and woodsman
needs to be--and set briskly to work to cook his own breakfast. He was
sitting up to his tea and bacon, close to the crackling stove, and the
world outside was looking considerably brighter, when his mother entered
the room.

"What is worryin' you, Davy?" she inquired anxiously. "I heard you
tossin' and turnin' last night."

"Nothing much," he replied. "I was just planning things. I've a heap to
do before Mr. Banks lands here with his patent range finders, and
seventeen different kinds of rifles. He's not the kind to kick at hard
hunting, and he's generous; but he likes to have everything tidy and
handy."

"I'm sure he'll have nothin' to complain of, Davy, so long as you look
after him," returned Mrs. Marsh. "But what kept you out so late last
night?"

"I was talking to Jim Harley."

"Oh, you were at the Harleys' place, were you? You seem to be gettin'
along fine in that quarter, Davy."

The young man blushed. "I wasn't at the house, mother," he said. "I met
Jim over at Rayton's, and we went for a walk together. He had a regular
talking fit on, I can tell you."

"I didn't know Jim was ever took that way," returned the mother. "So you
saw young Mr. Rayton, did you? And how is he?"

"He's all right, I guess."

"He's a very polite, agreeable young man."

"Oh, yes, he's polite enough."

Mrs. Marsh looked at him sharply.

"What have you got against Mr. Rayton?" she demanded.

"Nothing," replied David. "Nothing at all, mother. I don't know anything
about him, good or bad. But it's easy enough to be polite, I guess--and
it don't cost anything."

The mother sighed and smiled at the same time. "If it's so easy," she
said, "then I wish more folks about here would try it."

David drained his cup, and got to his feet. "Well, I must hustle along,
mother," he said. "I've got to run over to Harley's before I load up for
Teakettle Brook."

"Jim goin' with you?"

"No. Oh, no!"

"You wouldn't go callin' on a young lady this time in the morning,
surely?"

"Oh, quit your fooling, mother! I've simply _got_ to speak to Nell this
morning."

The moment the door had shut behind David, Mrs. Marsh went to the foot
of the stairs. "Wake up, pa!" she called.

"Wake up!" repeated a voice from above bitterly. "Bless my soul, I've
been awake an hour and up this last fifteen minutes; but I'm stuck for
want of my pants! D'ye expect me to chase 'round in the mud in my
Sunday-go-to-meetin's, ma?"

"Dear me!" exclaimed Mrs. Marsh. "I was patchin' them last night and
left them in the sittin' room." She ran and got her husband's required
garments, and threw them, flapping ungracefully, up the narrow back
staircase to him.

Soon after that old Davy appeared. "Where's the boy?" he asked.

"He's had his breakfast, and now he's run over to see Nell Harley,"
replied Mrs. Marsh, beaming.

"Then the more fool him!" said old Davy. "It's time he cut that out.
Ain't he got an eye in his head? He's got no more chance of marryin' her
than I'd have if I was into the game."

"D'ye mean that she don't think him good enough for her?" asked the
other sharply.

"I guess she don't think anything about him at all, from what I can see.
He's good enough for any girl--but he ain't got the _character_ to catch
Nell Harley. That's it--he ain't got the character."

"He's got as good a character as any young man in the province--as good
as _you_ had, at his age, David Marsh!"

The old man shook his head, smiling. "He's a good lad. I've nothin' to
say against our youngest son, ma. But he's all for his sportsmen and his
savings-bank account--all for himself. He's smart and he's honest--but
he's all for Number One. To catch a girl like Nell Harley a man would
want to jump right into the job with both feet, hell bent for election,
holusbolus and hokus-pokus and never say die--like I done when I went
a-courtin' you, ma."

Mrs. Marsh's face recovered its usual expression of good humor. "Maybe
you're right, pa," she said. "He don't seem to give his full mind to his
courtin', I must say."

In the meantime, young David had tramped the half mile of road that lay
between the Marsh farm and Jim Harley's place. The sun had come up white
and clean in a clear sky, promising a fine day. A few vivid red and
yellow leaves still hung in the maples and birches, and the frost
sparkled like diamonds in the stubble, and shone like powdered glass
along the fence rails. The air went tingling to heart and head like a
wine of an immortal vintage. David felt fairly reckless under the
influence of it; but when he came face to face with Nell Harley, in the
kitchen door, his recklessness turned to confusion.

"You are out early, Davy," said the young woman, smiling pleasantly. "Do
you want to see Jim?"

"Well--yes, I guess I do, Nell."

"Nothing the matter over at your house, I hope?"

"No. Everything's all right."

"Come in. We've finished breakfast, but Jim is not down yet. He was out
until late, last night, and I don't think he slept well."

David followed her as far as the dining-room door, but there he halted.

"I guess I won't trouble him, Nell," he said. "I'm in a hurry, too. I
have to get a load in to my camp on the Teakettle to-day."

"Can I give him a message?"

"Oh, no! It ain't important. Good morning, Nell."

He was halfway home, thoroughly disgusted with himself, when a voice
hailed him. Looking up, he saw old Captain Wigmore approaching.

"Good morning to you, David," said the captain, halting in front of him.
"Did James Harley explain his extraordinary behavior to you, last
night?"

"Yes."

"Ah! And what was the explanation?"

"You'd better ask him yourself, cap. He told me not to tell."

The old man drew himself up and rapped his stick on the ground.
"Confound his impertinence!" he exclaimed. "I shall ask him, certainly.
He owes me an explanation. Queer way to behave before a man of my age
and position! And he called me an old idiot!"




CHAPTER IV

THE TRAPPER'S CONFESSION


Old Captain Wigmore returned to his lonely but well-furnished and
well-painted house, ate a reflective breakfast, smoked a cigar, and then
set out to find Jim Harley. Wigmore lived with a servant or companion--a
very old, grizzled, silent fellow, who did not seem to be "all there."
It was from this old chap, Timothy Fletcher by name, that the people of
the settlement had learned to give Wigmore the title of captain. As to
what kind of a captain he had been, opinions differed.

Wigmore found Harley in the farm-yard helping a teamster get away with a
wagonload of pork, flour, and oats for his lumber camp on Harley Brook,
five miles away. As soon as man and load were gone, the captain
addressed the lumber operator.

"James," said he, slowly and with dignity, "I feel that you owe me an
explanation of your strange behavior of last night."

Harley sighed. "I can't explain it to you, captain," he said. "It has to
do with--with a purely family matter; but I beg your pardon for anything
amiss that I may have said to you in my excitement."

"Granted, James! Granted!" returned Wigmore, with a fine gesture of the
left hand. "But I am sorry, of course, that you--but it does not matter;
I am old, more or less of a stranger, and of no importance. You
explained your agitation to young Marsh, I understand?"

"Yes, I felt that I owed it to him."

"Very good, James. Of course I am anxious, and fairly itching with
curiosity--but my curiosity does not matter in the least. It struck me
as a most remarkable thing, though."

"I was foolish," said the other; "but should it happen that--that it
turns out to be serious--to really mean anything--may I confide in you,
captain? May I ask your advice?"

"Please do so, my dear boy," replied Wigmore cordially. "I shall be only
too happy to do anything for you--or for any member of your family. But
now I'll not keep you from your work any longer, James. If I may, I'll
just step over to the house and pay my respects to the ladies. I have a
new book in my pocket that they may be interested in."

"They'll be glad to see you, captain," said Jim sincerely. "They always
are."

So the captain went to the house and Mrs. Harley and Nell were glad to
see him, in spite of the fact that it was rather a busy time of day for
them to receive a caller. But the captain could be very entertaining
when he took the trouble to try--and he always took the required amount
of trouble when he met the Harley women. Now he produced the new book
from his pocket, and laid it on the table. It was a volume of literary
essays; and Nell took it up eagerly. The captain talked a little of
books, lightly and gracefully, and a little of travel and big cities. He
had a pretty wit. Except for the gray in his beard and mustache and
neatly brushed, thick hair, he did not look to be more than middle-aged
while he talked. Though he always walked with a slight limp, now he
stood very straight. His bright, dark eyes turned to Nell when she
looked away from him. He remained for about twenty minutes, and then
went away, leaving a very pleasant impression in the minds of both young
women.

"What a catch he would be if he wasn't so old!" said Jim's wife,
laughing.

Nell shook her head seriously. "He is very entertaining," she replied,
"and has read a great deal and seen a great deal; but there is something
about his eyes that--well, that is not attractive."

"Most eccentric people have eyes like that," returned Mrs. Harley--who,
by the way, was not a native of the settlement--"and I do not think them
unattractive. Now there is poor Dick Goodine. His eyes are like that,
too--so bright and quick."

"But Dick's are honest--and Captain Wigmore's look sly."

"Oh! You _like_ Dick's eyes, Nell? Well, I think you might find eyes to
admire belonging to some one more worth while than Dick Goodine."

"Don't be silly, Kate, _please_!" cried Nell. "I am no more interested
in the eyes of the young men of this place than you are."

"What about David Marsh?"

"Poor David. He is not amusing; and, though he looks so simple, I must
say that I cannot understand him."

Jim Harley went to see Rayton, and found him bringing his horses in from
the fields just at the fall of the dusk. The Englishman had been doing
a last bit of fall plowing before the frost gripped the land in earnest.
He was muddy, but cheerful; and as hospitable as ever. Harley stayed to
supper--a very good supper of his host's own cooking. Then they lit
their pipes and went into the sitting room, where a fine fire was
crackling in the open stove. Harley told Rayton the same story that he
had told, the night before, to young Marsh.

"Good heavens! That is very tragic!" exclaimed the Englishman. "But I
must say that I think last night's incident was nothing but chance. The
card had become marked in some way, quite by accident--and there you
are."

They talked for an hour or two, and Rayton would not give way an inch in
his argument, that the affair of the previous night had been nothing but
blind chance. He was much more impressed by the other's story of the
past, and felt a new interest in Jim Harley.

"I wish I could look at it as you do," said Jim, as he was leaving for
home. "But it seems to be more than chance to me--it looks like that
same damnable hate that killed my father."

"But why should it descend upon young Marsh? Surely he is not--that is,
Miss Harley does not----"

"I don't know," replied Jim. "I don't think so--but I don't know. The
thing worries me, anyhow--worries me like the devil! I'll keep my eyes
open, you may bet on that; and I'd consider it mighty friendly of you to
do the same."

"I'll do it, then, Jim, though I must say I'm not much of a hand at
solving mysteries or catching sinners. But I'll keep my peepers open,
you may gamble on that."

Reginald Baynes Rayton returned to his warm chair by the fire, and fixed
his mind, with an effort, on the solving of the mystery. He liked Jim
Harley, so he'd get to the bottom of that card trick if it burst his
brain. Suddenly he slapped his hand on his knee.

"I have it!" he cried. "By George, I have it! It's that blithering
bounder, Nash. He's always up to some rotten joke or other; and he's
heard that story about the mother and grandmother somewhere, and so
marked that card to take a rise out of Jim. He hasn't enough sense to
know if a thing is sacred or not. He's one of those dashed fools who
enjoy jumping in where angels fear to tread. That's it. By George, it
didn't take me long to work out that puzzle! But I'll just keep it to
myself for a while--to make sure, you know."

So he put the incident of the previous night out of his mind, and
thought of Harley's story, and of Harley's sister, instead. He knew
Nell, of course, but had not talked with her more than half a dozen
times. He admired her greatly; and now, since hearing this story of her
parents and her grandmother, he felt an extraordinary stirring of
tenderness toward her. He sighed, lit another pipe, and went up to bed.
He wanted to be up in the morning at even an earlier hour than usual,
for he had planned a long day in the woods. He had arranged with a lad
on the next farm to tend the stock for him during the day.

Rayton gave the animals their morning feed and breakfasted himself by
lantern light. Then, with the pockets of his shooting coat stored with
sandwiches and a flask of whisky and water, and with his grown spaniel,
Turk, wriggling about his feet, he set out for the big timber that
crowded right up to his back pastures from the hundreds of square miles
of wilderness beyond. A heavy frost had gripped the earth during the
night. The buckwheat stubble was crisp with it.

Dawn was spreading over the southeastern sky as he came to the edge of
the forest. He halted there, called Turk to heel, and filled and
started his pipe. His equipment was remarkable, and it would bother
some people to say what game he intended to go after with a dog and a
rifle. But Rayton knew what he was about. He wanted to bag a few brace
of ruffled grouse; but he did not want to miss any good chance that
might offer at moose, caribou, or deer. And he could not carry both
shot-gun and rifle. The dog was well trained and could be depended upon
not to trail, rush, or startle any big game. So it was Rayton's method
to let Turk flush the birds from the ground into the trees, from which
he would then shoot them with the rifle. He always fired at the head. Of
course, he missed the mark frequently, in which case the bird flew away
uninjured, as it is almost impossible to catch sight of a flying bird in
the high and thick covers of that country, this was a good and
sportsmanlike plan; and then he always had his rifle with him in case he
came across something bigger than grouse.

Rayton carried a compass, and was not above consulting it now and again.
Men have been lost in less formidable wildernesses than that--and have
never been found. By noon he had five grouse attached to his belt--each
minus its head--and had failed to get a clean shot at a bull moose. He
had crossed two small streams, and was now close to the Teakettle. He
sat down on a fallen hemlock, and brought a bone for Turk, and half the
sandwiches from his pocket. Suddenly the spaniel jumped to his feet with
a low, inquiring yap. Rayton turned and beheld Dick Goodine.

"Hello, Goodine, you're just in time," he cried cheerfully.

At that, Turk lay down again and gnawed at the bone.

"Good day, Mr. Rayton," replied the trapper.

He carried a rifle under his arm, and an axe and small pack on his
shoulder. He advanced, laid his axe and pack on the ground, and shook
hands with the Englishman. He was a handsome man, younger than the
farmer by a year or two, perhaps, and not so tall by a couple of inches.
His eyes were large and dark, and just now had a somewhat sullen light
in their depths. His face was swarthy and clean-shaven. He leaned his
rifle against an upheaved root, and sat down on the log beside Rayton.

"Any luck?" he asked.

"No," replied the Englishman, "How about you?"

"I've shot my three head already. I'm just cruisin' now, keepin' an eye
open for b'ar and fixin' up a few dead falls. Plenty of signs of fur
this year."

"Glad to hear it; but you don't look as gay as usual for all that. But
help yourself, Dick. Help yourself, and here's the flask."

Goodine removed his wide felt hat, smiling reflectively. "Thank'e," he
said, and took up a sandwich. Half of it was gone--and he ate
slowly--before he spoke again. "Well, I don't feel gay," he said.

"What's the trouble?"

"Oh, I have my troubles--like most of us, I guess. But just for the
moment it's Davy Marsh is kinder stickin' in my crop."

The other started, almost upsetting the flask which stood on the log
beside him.

"What's the matter with Davy?" he asked.

"I saw him this mornin', yonder at his camp on the Teakettle," replied
the trapper. "We had an argyment about guidin', a month or two ago--only
a word or two--an' he holds it against me. He was loadin' his canoe, for
Dan's River, when I sighted him. I sung out to him, friendly as you
please--and he didn't much more than answer me. Well, I've always put up
with Davy, because he can't help his manners, I guess, so I kep' right
along and helped him trim his canoe and get away downstream. But he was
sulky as a b'ar with a bee in his ear all the time, and kep' lookin' at
me as if I was dangerous. He was darn uncivil--an' that's a thing I
can't stand. I've bin sorter chewin' on it, ever since."

"Cheer up, Dick," returned Rayton, and laughed heartily. "You mustn't
let Davy Marsh's bad manners hump you. Take a drink and forget it." He
offered the flask.

Goodine shook his head. "I guess not, thank'e all the same," he said. "I
know your liquor is good. I've drunk it before, and there's no man in
the country I'd sooner take a _smile_ with than you, Mr. Rayton; but I'm
leavin' the stuff alone, now."

"Right you are, Dick," replied the other, returning the flask to his
pocket without quenching his own thirst.

"You see," said the trapper, "it makes a beast of me. If I got a taste
of it, now, I'd go out to the settlement and get some more, and keep at
it till I was a regular beast. So I reckon I'll cut it out." He looked
keenly at the Englishman. "Last time I was cornered," he continued,
"_she_ saw me!"

"Ah!" exclaimed Rayton. "Who saw you?"

"Nell Harley--the whitest woman on top the earth! _She_ saw me when I
was more like a hog than a man. I was shamed. I'm sick with the shame of
it this very minute."

Rayton looked embarrassed.

"Oh! I'm a fool to be talkin'," continued the other bitterly; "but I
can't keep wrestlin' with myself all the time. She's treated me
right--but I know she don't care a damn for me. And why should she? Oh!
I ain't _quite_ a fool! But I want her to think well of me--I want to
show her that I'm as decent as most men 'round these parts, and decenter
than some. Yes, I want her to see that--and I _can_ be decent, if I try.
I'm poor--but that's no disgrace in this country, thank God! My old man
was a drunkard; but my mother is a good woman, and honest. She is
French, from up Quebec way. I reckon some folks 'round here think that's
something for me to be ashamed of."

"Think _what_ is something to be ashamed of?"

"Bein' half French."

"The devil!" exclaimed Rayton indignantly. "Then they show their
ignorance, Dick. French blood is glorious blood. I'm pure English
myself, but I say that and stick to it. What was your mother's name?"

"Julie Lemoyne was her maiden name."

"That was a great name in Quebec, in the old days," replied Rayton
enthusiastically; "and it may still be, for all I know. There have been
great soldiers by that name, and some famous scholars, too." He clipped
a hand on the trapper's knee. "So cheer up!" he cried. "Very likely you
are descended from soldiers and scholars. Take it for granted, anyway,
and act accordingly--and you'll be the equal of anybody in this
province. Never mind Davy's bad manners, but take them for a warning.
And if--if you care for some one you consider to be too good for you,
just show her, by your actions--and by your life--that it is an honor to
enjoy your regard and friendship."

Dick Goodine looked at the speaker with glowing eyes. "You've done me
good!" he cried. "I feel more like a man, already. You're a wonder, Mr.
Rayton--a livin' wonder. Shake on it! I'm your friend, by damn! from now
till hell freezes over."

"Thanks. And I'm your friend," said Rayton, shaking the proffered hand
vigorously. "And I hope you'll forgive me for preaching," he added.

"Forgive you? I'll bless you for it, more likely," returned Dick.

They were about to part--for the trapper meant to spend the night in the
woods and the farmer wanted to get home before dark--when Goodine turned
again, a daring and attractive figure with axe and pack on his right
shoulder and the rifle in his left hand. "But don't think that I'm even
expectin' to be good enough for her," he said. "I'll try to be decent,
God knows!--but I'll still be just a poor, ignorant bushwhacker. You are
more the kind she ought to marry."

"Me! What are you thinking of, Dick?" cried Rayton.

"That's all right," replied the trapper, and vanished in the underbrush.

Rayton tramped and scrambled along with his mind so busy with thoughts
of Dick Goodine, of Nell Harley, and of David Marsh that, when he
arrived at his own pasture fence shortly after sunset, he discovered
that he had not added so much as one bird to his bag.

"The devil!" he exclaimed. "That comes of woolgathering. But never mind,
Turk, we'll do better to-morrow."

When he reached the house he found Doctor Nash's buggy in front of the
door, and the doctor inside.

"I thought I'd drop in and have a talk over that queer business of a
couple of nights ago," said Nash.

This dealt a blow to Rayton's suspicion. "Drive 'round and we'll put the
nag under cover, and give her a feed," he said.




CHAPTER V

DOCTOR NASH'S SUSPICIONS--YOUNG MARSH'S MISFORTUNE


Doctor Nash was a gentleman blessed with the deportment of early and
untrained youth, and with the years of middle age. His manners were
those of a first-year medical student, though he considered himself to
be a polished and sophisticated man of the world. He had practised in
four different parts of the country, but had nowhere impressed the
people favorably by his cures, or his personality. He was a bachelor. He
was narrow and lanky of build, but fat and ruddy of face. His hair was
carroty on top of his head, but of a darker shade in mustache and
close-trimmed beard. His eyes were small and light, and over the left,
the lid drooped in a remarkable way. Whenever he happened to remember
the dignity of his profession he became ridiculously consequential--and
even when he forgot it he continued to make a fool of himself.

These traits of character did not endear Doctor Nash to Mr. Rayton, but
they did not mar the perfection of the farmer's simple hospitality. He
produced a cold venison pie for supper, made coffee and buttered toast,
and flanked these things with a decanter of whisky on one side and a jug
of sweet cider on the other.

"Cold meat pie," remarked Nash slightingly--and immediately began to
devour it. After saying that he had never heard of such a thing as
buttered toast for supper he ate more than half the supply. He lost no
time in informing the other that he had always _dined_ in the evening
before fate had thrown him away on a backwoods practice.

Rayton haw-hawed regularly, finding this the easiest way of hiding his
feelings.

"Whisky!" exclaimed Nash, after his second cup of coffee with cream. "I
believe you live for it, Rayton. I never have it in my own house except
for medicinal purposes." Then he helped himself to a bumper that fairly
outraged his host's sense of proportions.

"I saw Miss Harley to-day," he said. "She told me that Jim had been to
see you, last night."

"Well?" queried Rayton, puzzled. "She does not object, does she?" His
mind had been furtively busy with the young woman throughout the meal.

"So I thought that he may have explained his queer behavior to you,"
said the other.

"Yes, he did."

"What did he say?"

"Really, Nash, I don't know that I have any right to repeat what he told
me."

"Did he ask you not to?"

"No; but perhaps he intended to do so and forgot."

Nash laughed uproariously. "You are the limit!" he exclaimed. "You beat
the band! Why should he tell you a thing that he would not want me to
know?"

Rayton suspected several reasons; but he did not want to offend his
guest by advancing them.

"Have you seen Jim since that night?" he asked.

"No."

"But saw his sister?"

"Yes. Jim wasn't at home."

Rayton lit his pipe, reflected for half a minute, and then gave his
guest a brief and colorless version of the story. He told it grudgingly,
wishing all the while that Harley had asked him not to repeat it.

Nash straddled his long, thin legs toward the fire. "So that's the
yarn, is it?" he sneered. "And do you believe it?"

"Believe it? What Harley told me?"

"Yes."

"Certainly I do."

"Then you are more of a fool than I took you for. Don't you see it's all
a game of Harley's to keep that young cub away from his sister? He
doesn't want to have such a lout hanging 'round all the time for fear it
may scare some one else away--some one who'd be a better catch. So he
rigged the card and invented the fine story."

Rayton withdrew his pipe from his lips and stared at his guest blankly.

"Oh! that was easy," continued Nash complacently. "I thought, until you
told me that yarn, that I really had hold of a problem worth solving.
But it is easy as rolling off a log. Here is the marked card. See, it is
marked in red chalk. A man could do that in two winks, right under our
noses." He handed the card to Rayton--the cross-marked six of clubs.
Rayton took it, but did not even glance at it. His gaze was fixed
steadily upon his guest.

"I don't quite follow you," he said--"or, at least, I hope I don't."

"Hope you don't follow me? What do you mean?"

"I mean just this, Doctor Nash. When you happen to be in my house be
careful what you say about my friends."

Nash stared. Then he laughed unpleasantly. "Are you bitten, too?" he
asked.

Rayton got to his feet. "See here, Nash, I don't want to cut up rusty,
or be rude, or anything of that kind," he exclaimed, "but I warn you
that if you don't drop this personal strain there'll be trouble."

"Personal strain!" retorted the other. "How the devil are we to talk
about that card trick, and the cause of it, without becoming personal?"

Rayton was silent.

"But you know what I think about it," continued Nash, "so you can make
what you please of it. I'll be going now. I'm not used to be jawed at by
a--by a farmer."

The Englishman laughed, helped his offended guest into his overcoat,
followed him to the stable, and hitched-in the nag for him.

"A word of advice to you," said Nash, when he was all ready to drive
away. "If you have your eye on Miss Harley, take it off. Don't run away
with any idea that Jim is trying to scare young Marsh out so as to clear
the road for you."

Then the whip snapped and away he rolled into the darkness.

Rayton stood in the empty barnyard for a long time, as motionless as if
he had taken root. "I'll keep a grip on my temper," he said at last.
"For a while, anyway. When I _do_ let myself out at that silly ass it'll
be once and for all."

Then he returned to the sitting-room fire and thought about Nell Harley.

"Goodine, Marsh, and Nash--they're all in love with her," he muttered.
"So it looks as if some one was up to some sort of dirty game with that
marked card, after all; but who the devil can it be? It's utter nonsense
to suspect poor Dick Goodine--or Jim; but it will do no harm to keep my
first idea about Nash in my mind. If he did it, though, I don't believe
it was in the way of a joke, after all."

Now to go back to the morning, and David Marsh. At break of day the
guide had started the horses and wagon back along the muddy twelve-mile
road to the settlement, in charge of a young nephew. They had been gone
an hour when Dick Goodine appeared. At that appearance it had
immediately jumped into his mind that the trapper was spying on him;
but he had kept the thought to himself. He had been greatly relieved,
however, to get away from the trapper's company and unsolicited
assistance. There was plenty of water in the brook, so he paddled
swiftly down the brown current for a mile or two. Then, feeling that he
had got clear of Goodine, he let the heavily loaded canoe run with the
current and filled his pipe.

"The more I see of that Goodine," he reflected, "the more I mistrust
him. And the cheek of him, poor and shiftless, to think about Nell. I
bet it was him put the marks on that card, somehow or other. The dirty
French blood in him would teach him how to do them kinder tricks. Why,
he ain't much better than a half-breed--and yet _he_ talks about bein'
above cookin' for sports, and lookin' after them in camp. He's too lazy
to do honest work, that's what's the matter. So long's he can raise
enough money to go on a spree now and then, he's happy. I don't trust
him. I don't like them black eyes of his. I bet he's been spying on me
ever since I got to the camp last night. Let him spy! He'd be scared to
try anything on with me; and if he thinks a girl like Nell would have
anything to do with a darn jumpin' Frenchman like him, he better go
soak his head."

So as the stream carried him farther and farther away from the spot
where he had left the trapper, his indignation against that young man
increased and his uneasiness subsided.

"I wish I'd up and asked him what the devil he wanted," he muttered,
"I'd ought to let him see, straight, what I think of him. But maybe he
was just lookin' for trouble--for a chance to get out his knife at me.
He wouldn't mind killin' a man, I guess--by the looks of him. No, he
wouldn't go so far as that, yet a while. That would cook his goose, for
sure."

Three miles below the camp, the Teakettle emptied into a larger stream
that was known as Dan's River. It was on the headwaters of this river
that Marsh had his second and more important sporting camp in a region
full of game. On reaching Dan's River, Marsh swung the bow of his canoe
upstream, keeping within a yard or two of the right bank. He laid his
paddle aside, took up a long pole of spruce, and got to his feet,
perfectly balanced. For the first quarter of a mile it was lazy work,
and then he came to a piece of swift and broken water called Little
Rapids. This was a stiff piece of poling, though not stiff enough under
any circumstances to drive an experienced canoe man to portaging around
it. David Marsh had mastered it, both ways, at all depths of water, more
than a dozen times. The channel was in midstream. The canoe shot across
the current and then headed up into that long rush and clatter of
waters. The young man set his feet more firmly and put his body into his
work.

The slim, deep-loaded craft crawled upward, foot by foot, the clashing
waters snarling along her gunwales and curling white at her gleaming
bow. Now David threw every ounce of his strength, from heel to neck,
into the steady thrust. The long pole bent under the weight, curved
valiantly--and broke clean with a report like a rifle shot. David was
flung outward, struggling to regain his balance; and, at the same
moment, the canoe swung side-on to the roaring water and then rolled
over.

David Marsh fought the whirling, buffeting waters with frantic energy.
He was struggling for his life. That was his only thought. He struck out
to steady himself, to keep clear of the boiling eddies where the black
rocks seemed to lift and sink, and to keep his head above the smother.
The beating, roaring, and slopping of the rapids almost deafened him,
and filled him with a shuddering dread of those raging, clamorous
surfaces, and silent, spinning depths. Now he saw the clear, blue sky
with a hawk adrift in the sunshine--and now he glimpsed one shore or the
other, with dark green of spruce, and a spot or two of frost-bitten
red--and now black sinews and twisting ribbons crossed his vision, and
torn spray beat against his sight with white hands. The deathly chill of
the water bit into blood and bone.

It seemed to him that he was smothered, spun and hammered in this hell
of choking tumult for hours. At last the roar and clatter began to
soften in his ears--to soften and sweeten to a low song. Wonderful
lights swam across his eyes--red, clearest green and the blue of the
rainbow. A swift, grinding agony in his right arm aroused him. He was
among the rocks at the tail of the rapids. For a minute he fought
desperately; and then he dragged himself out of the shouting river and
lay still.

Marsh was young and strong, and had not swallowed a serious amount of
water. For ten minutes he lay under the leafless willows, unconsciously
struggling for his breath. Then he sat up, swayed dizzily, and screamed
suddenly with the pain in his arm. It was that excruciating pain,
burning and stabbing from wrist to shoulder, that brought him fully to
his senses. He staggered to his feet and gazed up and down the bright
course of the river. He shivered with cold and weakness.

"Arm smashed!" he cried, almost sobbing. "Outfit lost! My God!"

He sank again, easing himself to the ground by the willows with his left
hand. With the bandanna handkerchief from his neck, a piece of cord from
his pocket, a few handfuls of dry grass, and a thin slip of driftwood he
made a rough support for his arm and fastened it securely to his side.
This took him fully half an hour, and caused him intense pain and severe
nervous fatigue. He was shaking and gasping by the time it was
done--yes, and on the verge of tears.

"The pole broke," he whimpered. "And it was a good pole--the best I
could find. It never happened before."

He got to his feet again, and started painfully along the shore. The
bank was steep, with only a narrow fringe of rocky beach. In some places
the overhanging thicket forced him to wade knee-deep in the water. He
stumbled along, groaning with the pain of his arm. His cheeks were
bloodless under the tan, and there was a haunted look in his eyes. Fear
still gripped him--not the violent, sickening horror that he had felt
while struggling in the eddies of the rapid, but a quiet, vague fear
that he could give no name to.

Marsh rested for a few minutes on a little grassy flat at the mouth of
the Teakettle. By this time the sun, and his own exertions, had warmed
him a little; but still the shadow of fear was in his eyes. "It was a
strong pole," he kept muttering. "I cut it myself--and tested it. How
did it come to break!"

He found the footing along the smaller stream even more difficult than
that which he had left behind. Both banks were flanked with impenetrable
snarls of underbrush that overhung the gliding current, and so he was
forced to wade, knee-deep. The bottom was rocky and slippery, and the
swift water dragged mercilessly at his weary legs. He advanced slowly,
painfully, a pitiful figure. Sometimes he stumbled, almost fell, and
jarred his shattered arm in his recovery. Sometimes he groaned.
Sometimes he cursed aloud. "My luck's gone!" he cried. "The pole broke
on me--and it was a good pole. Never broke a pole before! Never got
spilled before! Something damn queer about that!" He was forced to rest
frequently, sitting on a stranded log or flat rock, or perhaps standing
and clinging to the alders and willows. His arm ached numbly now. Now
showers of silver sparks streamed across his vision, and again he saw
little blue and red dots dancing in the sunlight.

[Illustration: "HE ADVANCED SLOWLY, PAINFULLY, A PITIFUL FIGURE"]

It took him a long time to cover the three miles from the mouth of the
Teakettle up to the little camp that he had sped so swiftly away from
early that morning. It was long past noon when he dragged himself up the
steep path, unfastened the door, and stumbled into the shack. After a
few minutes' rest on the floor, he managed to light a fire in the stove
and put a kettle of water on to boil. He needed tea--tea, hot and
strong. That would pull him together for the twelve-mile journey that
lay between him and Doctor Nash. But he'd lie down until the water
boiled. He pulled off his moccasins and crawled into a bunk, drawing two
pairs of heavy blankets over him. He was too tired to think--too tired
even to continue his whimpering and cursing. After a minute he dozed
off.

David Marsh was awakened shortly by a touch on his injured arm. He
yelled with the pain of it even before he opened his eyes. Then he
stared, for there stood a young woman named Maggie Leblanc, gazing at
him in astonishment. She was a fine-looking young woman in a striking,
but rather coarse red and black way. She was roughly dressed, and had an
old muzzle-loading gun by her side, and five partridges hanging at her
belt. She was the eldest of many children belonging to a worthless
couple who lived about two miles from the Marsh farm, in a poor
community called French Corner. It was in that same part of the
settlement that Dick Goodine's mother lived.

"Hell!" exclaimed Marsh. "Where'd you come from, Maggie?"

"What are you yelling about?" asked the girl. "An' what are you layin'
there for, this time o' day?"

"I'm hurt," returned David. "My arm is broke, I guess." Then he told her
all about his morning's misfortune.

"And Dick Goodine was here, was he!" cried the girl. "He helped you load
the canoe, did he! And then your pole broke! Are you good friends with
Dick Goodine?"

David looked at her eagerly. "Not particular," he answered. "What are
you drivin' at?"

"He's after your girl, ain't he?" she asked, her black eyes glistening.

"Look here, what are you drivin' at, Maggie?"

She came close to the edge of the bunk. "Maybe he knows what made the
pole break! I've heard o' that trick before. He put it in the canoe for
you, didn't he?"

"Yes!" cried the young man furiously. "Yes, he did. Damn him!--if he
played that dirty trick on me."

"You lay quiet," said Maggie Leblanc. "I'll cook you a bite o' dinner,
an' then I'll light out for Doctor Nash. You ain't fit to travel another
step."




CHAPTER VI

DAVID TAKES A MISFORTUNE IN A POOR SPIRIT


David drank tea, Maggie Leblanc holding the tin mug to his lips. The
pain in his arm became more intense as his strength returned. His temper
was raw. He refused the bacon which the girl fried for him.

"Hell!" he exclaimed, "I feel too bad to eat. I feel like the very
devil, Maggie. Arm busted, canoe and outfit lost! Hell!"

"I guess that skunk, Dick Goodine, done you pretty brown," remarked the
girl. "Dick's cute. Always was. He bested you just like he'd best a mink
or a fox. You ain't no match for Dick Goodine, Davy."

David Marsh cursed bitterly.

"That durn half-breed!" he cried. "Me no match for him! You wait and
see, Maggie. I'll get square with him, one of these days."

"Dick ain't no half-breed," retorted the girl. "He's French and
English--and that mixture don't made a breed. Got to have Injin blood,
like me, to make a breed."

"Injin blood's better'n his mixture," said David. "Hell, yes! Dick
Goodine's pure skunk. But I'll do him yet. You just watch, Maggie. Arm
busted! Canoe busted and outfit sunk! He'll pay me for that."

"You think a heap o' yer money, Davy," said Maggie Leblanc.

"You go get the doctor," returned the young woodsman sullenly, "and
leave my affairs alone. Money? Well, I guess I make it hard enough. You
go 'long now, Maggie, like a good girl, and get Doctor Nash--or maybe
I'll never have the use o' this arm again. It's stiffenin' up terrible
quick. I'll make it worth yer while, Maggie. Five dollars! How'll five
dollars do?"

"I'm goin'," answered Maggie. "But you keep yer money. I don't want yer
five dollars. I'll fetch the doc, and I'll help you get square with that
skunk Dick Goodine, all for nothin'. You bet! Lay still, now, and I'll
light out for the settlement."

"I thought you was sweet on Dick Goodine; but you don't seem much that
way now, Maggie. What's he bin doin' to you?" asked David.

"Yer mind yer own business, Davy Marsh," retorted the young woman, "and
don't you give none o' yer cheek to me. I'm helpin' you, ain't I? Then
mind yer manners!"

Then, with a toss of her handsome head, she hurried from the shack.

Left alone under that low roof in the quiet forest, with the afternoon
sunshine flooding in by open door and window, David gave his mind
unreservedly to his accident, considering it from many points of view.
He had accepted Maggie Leblanc's suggestion without question--that
Goodine had caused the disaster by injuring his canoe pole in some way.
Now, alone in the silent forest, he thought of the marks on the card,
and remembered the story that Jim Harley had confided to him. It was
foolishness, of course, to set any store by two red crosses on a playing
card--and yet--and yet----

Queer things happen, he reflected. The devil still takes a hand in the
games of men. The idea of the blow being the work of a supernatural
agency, directed by the marked card, grew upon him. But even so, what
more likely than that Dick Goodine had cut his canoe pole--had been
chosen as the instrument of fate? One has strange fancies when lying
faint and hurt in a silent wilderness, in a golden, empty afternoon.

The sunlight gradually died away from window and door. David thought of
his loss and counted the money that would slip from his fingers, owing
to the broken arm. This was bitter food for the mind of such a man as
David Marsh. Mr. Banks, the rich and generous American sportsman, would
soon be at Samson's Mill Settlement--only, alas, for the profit of some
other than the unfortunate Davy. It was a hard fact to consider, but at
last the sullen young man fell asleep with the weight of it on his mind.

He dreamed of a life-and-death struggle with a Spanish count, who looked
like Dick Goodine dressed up in queer clothes. The Spanish nobleman ran
a knife into his arm and the pain was sickening. The count vanished, and
beside him stood a young man in a blue coat with brass buttons, whom
they called Jackson. This Mr. Jackson had a terrible leer on his face,
and a huge pistol in his right hand. Seizing David by the collar, he
hammered him with the pistol upon the wound made by the Spaniard's
knife. David yelled with the pain of it--and woke up! Above him leaned
Doctor Nash, holding a lantern, and with a finger on the broken arm.
"Quit it!" cried David. "Quit it, doc! That's the busted place yer
pinchin'."

A painful period of twenty minutes followed, and at the end of it
David's arm was in splints and bandages, and David's face was absolutely
colorless. Nash brought him 'round with a long drink of brandy.

"Hell!" said David. "That's all I want to see of you for the rest o' my
life, doc."

The doctor grinned, mopped his heated brow, and set the lantern on the
table. "Oh, that's nothing," he said. "Booh! I've done ten times as much
as that before breakfast. Keep still, now, and give it a chance. Your
arm will be as good as new in a few months."

David groaned. Nash built up the fire.

"I'm hungry," he said. "Where d'you keep your grub? Got anything fit to
eat?"

"I reckon yes," returned the woodsman. "There's plenty of grub in this
camp, and every durn ounce of it is fit for anybody to eat. Well, I
guess! There's eggs in that there box on the floor, and bacon in the
cupboard, and tea and coffee, and everything. Help yourself, doc. It was
bought to feed Mr. Banks--so I guess you'll find it good enough for
you."

"Don't get excited, David," retorted the doctor. "Keep your hair on, or
maybe you'll keep your arm from knitting."

He cooked a good meal, gave a little of it to his patient, and devoured
the choicer, and by far the larger, share of it himself. Then he lit his
pipe and drew a stool close up to the bunk in which David lay.

"You are not fit to move to-night," he said, "so I'll stay here and take
you in to-morrow morning. I managed to get my rig through the mud-holes
without breaking anything, I guess."

David moved his feet uneasily.

"Guess you'll be chargin' me pretty heavy for this, doc," he returned.

"Don't you worry," returned Nash. "I'll only charge what's fair, Davy.
Of course it was quite a serious operation, and a long drive--but don't
you worry."

He drew at his pipe for a little while in silence. At last he said:
"Maggie Leblanc tells me it was Dick Goodine who worked the dirty trick
on you. Is that so?"

"I guess so. Don't see what else. The pole was a good one, far's I
know."

"What's the trouble between you and Dick? I didn't know he was that
kind."

"Well, we had an argyment a while back. Nothin' serious; but he's a
spiteful kind of cuss. Dirty blood in him, I guess."

Nash nodded. "And perhaps you think the marks on that card had something
to do with it. Isn't that so, Davy? I guess Jim Harley has told you what
those marks mean."

"That's all durned foolishness. Marks on a card! How'd them little
crosses break my pole and upset me into the rapids?"

"Sounds fine, Davy; but you are scared of that marked card, all the
same. Don't lie to me--for it's no use. I think the marks on the card
have something to do with your broken arm."

"How, doc? No, yer foolin'! Yer tryin' to make game of me. I ain't a
scholar, like you, doc, but I ain't fool enough to believe in ghosts,
just the same."

"I am not saying anything about ghosts, Davy. You just keep your hair
on, and I'll tell you what I think. In the first place, just remember
that I am a man with a trained mind and a wide knowledge of life."

"Guess yer right, doc. Fire away!"

"Jim Harley told you that long story of his about his grandmother?"

"That's so."

"Do you believe it?"

"Maybe I do--and maybe I don't. What's that to you?"

"Of course you believe it! That's because your mind is untrained, and
you don't know anything of the ways of the world."

"You just leave my mind alone, doc. It ain't hurtin' you, I guess. You
talk as if I hadn't any more brains than a sheep."

Nash grinned, and rubbed his long hands briskly together. He enjoyed
this sort of thing.

"Right you are. You believe Jim's story--and I don't. What I think is
this: Jim Harley marked the card, dealt it to you, and then invented the
yarn. He is trying to scare you away--away from fooling around his
sister."

"You just let his sister alone, doc! And mind yer own business, too!"

"Keep cool, my boy. Well, he scares you a bit with his story. Then he
has a talk to Dick Goodine. He knows Dick and you are not very good
friends. So he fixes Dick, and Dick fixes your canoe pole--and there you
are! Jim and Dick do the busting, and I do the mending. What do you
think of that?"

"Durned foolishness!" retorted David. "Maybe Goodine done it; but Jim
didn't set him to it. I guess I know Jim Harley a durn sight better'n
you do."

"Oh, yes! You are a devilish clever chap, David--in your own opinion.
Just the same, my smart young friend, take the hint from me and stop
thinking about Nell Harley. You are not wanted 'round that vicinity, and
if Jim can't scare you away with his card trick and his silly story,
he'll scare you with something else."

David Marsh was raging; but he was helpless in the bunk, with a broken
arm to remember. He swore like the proverbial trooper--and Doctor Nash
sat and smoked, with his sneering grin broad on his fat face. He did not
say a word in reply to the woodsman's tirade. At last David lay back
weakly, breathless, and empty of oaths. Nash re-filled his pipe.

"Think it over quietly," he said. "Are the red marks after you? Or is
Dick Goodine after you, on his own trick? Or is Jim Harley working a
game on you? Think it over, Davy, and don't swear at your friends."

David's reply was a grunt; but he spent half the night in thinking it
over. The harder he thought the more hopelessly confused he became.

During the drive to the Marsh farm next morning, Doctor Nash carefully
avoided the subject of the marked cards and his suspicions. As there was
not much else to talk of in Samson's Mill Settlement, just then, the
drive was a quiet one. After helping his patient into the house the
doctor drove away.

Jim Harley came over to see David in the afternoon. The sufferer
received him with open suspicion, but Harley's manner soon drove the
shadow away. He listened to the story of the accident with every sign of
distress, and was impressed by the fact that Dick Goodine had helped
load and launch the canoe. He knew that David and the trapper were not
on friendly terms, and he believed the latter to be dangerously
quick-tempered; but he could scarcely bring himself to believe that he
would carry a grudge so far as to endanger a man's life.

"Have you and Dick had words about anything else?" he asked, "anything
more than that argument about guiding sportsmen?"

"I guess he holds something else against me," admitted the guide.

"What is it? What have you ever done to him?" asked Harley.

David shifted about uneasily in his chair, and became very red in the
face. In the depth of his heart he feared Jim Harley.

"I ain't done anything to him," he said falteringly. "I--I ain't said
one uncivil word to him, except that time we had the tongue fight. He
just don't like me, that's all. He don't like me because I'm a smarter
guide than him, and get hold of all the rich sports; and--and I guess he
thinks--well, he thinks----"

"What? What does he think?" demanded Harley.

"Well, you see, Jim, he--I guess he kinder thinks I've got the--the
inside track, so to speak."

"Inside track? You mean with the sportsmen? You have the best camps, and
all that sort of thing. I guess he's right, Davy."

"That ain't just exactly what I mean, Jim. I ain't talking about guidin'
and campin' now. Lookee here, you know as how I'm kinder--well, as how I
am almighty fond o' Nell. You know that, Jim, for I've told you before.
Well, Dick Goodine's struck a bit that way, too, far's I can make out.
Durned cheek; but that's the truth. So I guess that's maybe why he's got
an axe behind his back for me."

Jim Harley sighed and shook his head mournfully.

"I hadn't thought about that," he said; "but now that you mention it,
Davy, I see that it may be so. I've always found Dick a good-hearted
fellow--but I guess he goes on the rip now and again. Not extra
steady--and not the kind to marry my sister. He's not steady, you
see--and he's so danged ignorant."

Jim made these last remarks in a low, reflective voice, as if he were
talking only to himself. Tone and words fanned David's old suspicions
into sudden flame.

"Yes, he's danged ignorant!" he cried. "Danged ignorant, just like me.
That's what you mean, ain't it? You don't want Nell to marry a
bushwhacker like Dick Goodine--nor like me. That's about right, ain't
it, Jim? My first guess was right t'other night, I do believe."

Harley stared at him in angry amazement.

"You are talking like a blasted fool!" he exclaimed. "You were on the
same string before, and I went to a good deal of trouble to set you
right. Too much trouble, I see now. But I tell you again, if I objected
seriously to you, David, you'd damn soon know it. You make me tired."

"I didn't mean to rile you, Jim," returned the guide, "but what with the
gnawin' pain in my arm, and--and that story you told me about them marks
on the card--and them marks being dealt to me--I tell you, Jim, I don't
feel easy. I feel jumpy as a cat. Here I am with my arm busted already,
and a canoe and outfit gone clear to the devil. I never lost a canoe
before--nor bust my arm before."

"I am sorry, David. I am mighty sorry," said Harley. "It is hard luck,
no mistake about that, but all I can say is, I don't wish you any harm,
and never have. If you think Goodine is laying for you, keep your eye on
him. If you think there is anything in those marks on the card--well,
you know the story. Act as you think best for yourself, Davy."

"Thankee. I'll keep my eye skinned; but I tell you now, Jim, I ain't
scart o' them marks on the card. I believe all you told me--but I guess
it was just luck that brought them marks to this settlement and handed
them out to me. I don't think fer one minute they busted my arm or
upset my canoe."

After the evening meal, Jim Harley visited Rayton. The Englishman was in
his sitting room, writing letters before a good fire. He pushed his
papers aside and received his visitor with that manner of perfect
hospitality which was as natural to him as his frequent laughter. He had
already heard rumors of David's accident, but when Jim told the full
story, he replied in forceful terms that Dick Goodine had no part in it.

"But it looks queer," persisted Jim Harley.

"Looks!" retorted the Englishman. "My dear Harley, didn't a canoe pole
ever break before? Is this the first man who ever smashed his arm? Rot!
I know Goodine, and he's the right sort. He's a man."

Harley had great faith in Reginald Rayton's opinions; but he could not
get his suspicions of the trapper out of his head.

"Don't think any more about it," urged his host. "You might as well
suspect Ben Samson--or old Wigmore. Drop it--and have a drink."

So Jim dropped it and had a drink. But he was worried and preoccupied
throughout the evening. When he was about to leave, however, he shook
himself together.

"If you are ever lonely," he said, "come over and see us."

"Thanks very much," returned Rayton, gripping his hand. "I get a bit
lonely, sometimes. Ah--perhaps you'll see me to-morrow night, if that
will be convenient."

At that moment Turk jumped to his feet, uttered a low growl, and ran to
the window. Rayton jumped after him and snatched the curtain aside.
Nothing was to be seen, though a pale half-moon was shining clearly.

"That's queer," said Rayton. "Turk never gives false alarms."




CHAPTER VII

MR. BANKS TAKES A HAND IN THE GAME


Mr. Harvey P. Banks, of New York, was an angry and dejected man when he
arrived at Samson's Mill Settlement, only to learn that his guide of
several past seasons--in fact, the only available professional guide in
the district--was laid up with a broken arm. He poured the full stream
of his wrath upon the unfortunate David Marsh. He was a big man--tall,
thick, broad, and big of face and hand, big of voice, foot, and outlook
upon life--and his size seemed to fill the little farmhouse bedroom and
press poor David against the wall. After expressing himself at length,
he asked why the guide had not wired to him, so as to give him time to
make other arrangements.

Now that was a question that David had asked himself, too late. He
answered truthfully, his courage reviving as he realized that his excuse
was a pretty good one. He told of his accident in detail, of his
suspicion of Dick Goodine, and then, after another question or two, he
went back and described the game of poker, the marked card, and told Jim
Harley's story. Thus he explained a state of mind that had turned big
business considerations into unimportant shadows and meaningless
whisperings.

Through it all Mr. Harvey P. Banks sat in a splint-bottomed
chair--bulging generously over the edges of the seat--smoking a long
cigar, and gazing unblinkingly at the young woodsman. He nodded his big
head when David finished, and flipped a two-inch white ash from the end
of his cigar to the hooked mat at his feet.

"That's good enough for me, Marsh," he said. "I take back the hard names
I called you a few minutes ago. No wonder you forgot to send me a wire."

He turned his head and gazed through the window at a field of buckwheat
stubble, rusty-red, and a green-black wall of spruces and firs.

"Jim Harley told you the story, you say?"

"Yes, sir; Jim Harley. Doctor Nash don't believe it."

"Nash be blowed! And you say Jim acted very strangely when he saw the
marks on the card in your hand."

"Yes, sir; he acted mighty queer. Doctor Nash says it was all a bluff,
though."

"T'hell with Nash! How did the others take the sight of the red
crosses?"

"Quiet enough, sir. They was all took up with Jim's queer look and
words."

"And Rayton?"

"He just looked like an astonished horse, Mr. Banks. That's his natural
look."

"And Captain Wigmore?"

"Oh, it didn't bother him none, you can bet yer hat on that."

Mr. Banks nodded again. "It wouldn't," he said reflectively. "A mark on
a card wouldn't interest that old clam, I imagine, unless it was on the
back, where it might be of some use to him."

He asked several more questions about the chances of obtaining good
heads of moose and caribou in the Beaver Brook, Teakettle, and Dan's
River country this season, talked of past adventures which he had shared
with the young woodsman, and slipped in more than one query concerning
Maggie Leblanc. Then, promising to see David again in a day or two, he
lit another cigar and took his departure.

Ten minutes later, on the road, Harvey P. Banks met Reginald Baynes
Rayton. The Englishman wore his oldest pair of breeches, but their cut
was undeniable. Banks' eyes were sharp, though their expression was
usually exceedingly mild.

"You are Mr. Rayton, who is farming the old Bill Hooker place, I am
sure," he said.

"Yes. And you are Mr. Banks, of New York, I'm quite positive," returned
Rayton, lifting a shabby felt hat, and laughing pleasantly. There was
nothing to laugh at--but Reginald had a way of laughing politely at
everything and nothing. It meant nothing, but it covered profound
meanings.

Mr. Banks returned the unexpected salute with a fine gesture of his
tweed cap, and then the two shook hands.

"I have just been to see poor David Marsh," said Banks. "I blew him up
pretty high, at first, but I melted when I heard what he has on his
mind."

"Yes, he seems to be in a funk about one thing and another," returned
Rayton. "But it is rough on you, too. But--ah--I think I can help
you--if you don't consider it cheeky of me to--to make a suggestion."

"Cheeky! My dear Mr. Rayton, I'll bless you for a likely suggestion."

"Then let me put you on to some good shooting. I know this country
fairly well, considering I'm a new settler, and this is my slack season
on the farm. I can help you to a couple of good heads, I'm positive. We
can make my house our headquarters, for the game is very close in this
year. The house is snug, and I am something quite special in the cooking
line. What do you say?"

"It sounds mighty tempting, but--well, Mr. Rayton, I am a business man,
and I like to see the business end of every proposition before I start
in."

Rayton laughed freely, but politely.

"Of course," he said. "I am a farmer--and I see what you mean. The
business end of some propositions is like the hinder end of a wasp,
isn't it? Hah-hah! But--if you don't mind--well, I don't see how we can
put any business end to this. Ah--if you will be so kind as just to
consider yourself my guest. Hope you don't think it cheeky of me!"

"Well! 'Pon my word, Mr. Rayton, you are very kind. Why should you
befriend me like this? It is astonishing."

"Not at all. We can have some good talks, you see. I am a bit lonely,
sometimes. It is all serene, isn't it? Good. Where are your traps? Come
along."

So they turned and walked side by side along the road and across the
empty fields to Rayton's house. Mr. Banks glanced frequently and
wonderingly at his new friend. Never before, in all his wide and active
life, had his confidence been captured so quickly.

"And he seems to take me quite as a matter of course," he reflected.

That afternoon the two new friends, with Turk's assistance, shot a few
brace of woodcocks and grouse, in quiet swales and corners around the
outskirts of the farm. Then, together, they cooked supper. Shortly after
supper, while they were playing a game of chess, and smoking two of Mr.
Banks' long and superior cigars, old Captain Wigmore knocked on the
front door, and entered without waiting for it to be opened for him.
Rayton welcomed him as affably as if they had last parted on the most
polite terms. He introduced the small old man to the big middle-aged
one.

"We have met before," said the captain.

"Yes, I knew Captain Wigmore last year," said Banks.

Wigmore accepted a cigar from the New Yorker's bulging case.

"That is the real thing--the real leaf," he said. He looked at the
chessmen.

"Reginald, when are we to have another game of poker? I am sure Mr.
Banks plays the game of his nation. We must sit in again soon. We must
not be frightened away from a harmless amusement by that silly trick Jim
Harley played on us a few nights ago."

Mr. Banks feigned astonishment. "What was the trick?" he asked. "I
should never have suspected Harley of playing a trick--especially a card
trick. He has always seemed to me a very serious chap."

"Rather a queer thing happened a few nights ago, while we were playing
poker, here," said Rayton. "Captain Wigmore thinks Harley was at the
bottom of it; but I don't. Tell about it, captain."

So for the second time, Banks heard of the card marked with two red
crosses and dealt to young David Marsh. He watched Wigmore throughout
the telling as intently as he had watched the guide.

"Very interesting? Jim Harley is not such a serious fellow as I
thought," he said, by way of comment. And that was all until after
Wigmore took his leave, at half-past ten. Wigmore had not mentioned the
tradition behind the two red marks. When the door had closed upon the
queer old captain, Rayton and Banks talked for nearly an hour about
Harley's story of the red crosses, and David Marsh's experience of them.
The Englishman convinced the New Yorker that Dick Goodine had played no
part in David's accident. Mr. Banks, like Jim Harley, found it natural
to accept Rayton's readings of men and things.

Mr. Banks lay awake in his comfortable bed for a full hour after turning
in, his mind busy with the mystery of Samson's Mill Settlement. He
decided that whoever marked the card had known the tragic story of the
Harley family. He did not take much stock in David's accident. That had
been nothing more nor less than a piece of bad luck. Canoe poles break
frequently, owing to some hidden flaw in the white wood. But he felt
sure that the two red crosses on the face of the card were not matters
of chance.

"I'll work this thing out if it drives me crazy. I have always had an
itch to do a bit of detective work," he murmured.

Then he sank into deep and peaceful slumber.

When Banks entered the kitchen next morning, at an early hour, he found
the porridge neglected and sullenly boiling over the brim of the pot
onto the top of the stove, and his host standing with drooped shoulders
gazing mournfully at a five-foot length of spruce pole that stood in the
corner. Banks jumped ponderously and rescued the porridge.

"What's the trouble?" he asked. "Are you thinking of beating some one
with that stick?"

Rayton laughed joylessly. "This is too bad!" he said. "Molly Canadian,
the busy old idiot, brought this in to me only a few minutes ago. Silly
old chump!"

"What is it? And who is Molly Canadian?"

"She's an old squaw--and a great pal of mine. This thing is a piece of a
canoe pole."

"Ah! Piece of a pole. Why does it interest and depress you so?"

"She found it at the foot of the rapids in which young Marsh came to
grief. Yesterday, she says. If you look at the broken end of it you'll
notice that the surface is remarkably smooth for about halfway across."

"Ah! It has been cut! Cut halfway through! Do you think it is David's
pole?"

"I am afraid it is the one he broke. It was found at the foot of the
rapids."

Mr. Banks scratched his clean-shaven chin.

"Looks as if you had put your trust in a lame horse," he said.

"Yes, it looks that way," admitted the Englishman, "but I don't believe
Dick Goodine cut that pole! I know Goodine--but I'm not so sure of this
pole. Sounds silly; but that's the way I feel. I'm not much on reasoning
things out, but I've a few pretty clear ideas on this subject. From what
you tell me that Marsh told you, it is quite evident that Maggie Leblanc
is anxious to get Dick into a mess. Well?"

"You think the girl cut the pole?"

"Yes. Why not? She has Maliseet blood in her, you know--English, French,
and Maliseet. She is a fine looking girl, in her way and of her kind,
but I've seen two devils shining in her eyes."

"Would she run the risk of killing one man, just on the chance of
getting another into trouble?"

"I won't say that of her, Banks, but there'd be no need for her to run
that risk. Finding David in his camp, with a broken arm, evidently
suggested to her the chance of making trouble for Goodine. Then why
shouldn't she travel over to the rapids and hunt for the pole--or a part
of it? With luck, she'd find it. Then she could trim the broken end a
little, and leave it where it would be most likely to be found."

"Where was it found? In an eddy?"

"No. High and dry on top of a flat rock."

"That certainly looks fishy!" exclaimed the New Yorker. "I'm with you,
Rayton, no matter how severely you test my--my imagination. Shake on it,
old man!"

They shook.

"I am greatly relieved," said the Englishman.

"You see, unless I get outside opinion, I am never quite sure if the
things I think of all by myself have any sense in them or not. Well, I
am mighty glad you see it the same way I do. As soon as Molly told me
where she had found the piece of pole, I smelt a rat. Of course I'd
never have thought of all that about Maggie Leblanc, except for my
thorough belief in Dick Goodine. That set me to work. Now we had better
have breakfast."

Mr. Banks nodded.

"Why don't you set seriously to work to straighten out the marked card
business?" he asked.

"I have; but it just takes me 'round and 'round," said Rayton.

They had just finished their breakfast when Dick Goodine appeared, ready
to take them into the woods for a day, after moose. He brought a boy
with him to look after the place and the live stock, in case the
sportsmen should be kept out all night. The three left the house shortly
after seven o'clock.

Early in the afternoon Banks shot an old bull moose carrying a fine pair
of antlers. They skinned and dressed it, and hung hide, flesh, and
antlers in a tree; they pressed forward, for they were near a great
square of barren land, where the chances of finding caribou were good.
They reached the barren, sighted a small herd, and Rayton dropped a
fair-sized stag, and after making packs of the antlers, hide, and the
best cuts, they struck the homeward trail.

It was dark by the time the tree in which the remains of the moose was
hung was reached, so they made camp there for the night. At the first
break of dawn they were up and afoot again, and though heavily loaded,
they made good time. They halted only half an hour for their midday
meal, and reached Rayton's farm shortly after three o'clock in the
afternoon. Old Captain Wigmore was there to welcome them. They found him
in the sitting room, very much at his ease, with a decanter of the
Englishman's whisky on the table in front of him. Rayton laughed
good-humoredly, shook his hand cordially, and invited him to stay for
the remainder of the day.

"Gladly, my dear boy," returned the captain. He seemed to be in a much
better humor than was usual with him. The sportsmen washed, changed, and
had a long and quiet smoke, and when the smoke was finished it was time
to get the evening meal. Rayton and Dick Goodine went to the kitchen,
and set to work. They were interrupted by Timothy Fletcher, the
captain's reserved and disagreeable old servant. Timothy's wrinkled face
wore an expression of intense anxiety and marks of fatigue.

"Cap'n here?" he asked, looking in at the kitchen door.

"Yes, he's here," replied Rayton, with a note of sharpness in his voice.
The soul of politeness himself, he could not stand intentional rudeness
in others.

"Glad to hear it. I've been huntin' over the hull damn country for him,"
remarked Timothy.

"Do you want to speak to him?" asked Rayton.

Before the other could answer, Wigmore himself darted into the kitchen.

"What the devil do you want?" he cried, going close up to his servant,
and shaking a thin but knotty fist in his face. "Go home, I tell you."

His frail body trembled, and his very beard seemed to bristle with
wrath.

"But--but I thought you was lost," stammered the old servant.

"Get out!" screamed Wigmore. "Go home and mind your own business."

Timothy Fletcher stood his ground for a few seconds, staring keenly into
the captain's face. Then, without another word, he turned and walked out
of the kitchen. Old Wigmore glared around, swore a little, mumbled an
excuse, and followed his servant.

"That old captain is a character," said Mr. Banks. "He's worth
watching."

"He's a queer cuss, and no mistake," agreed Dick Goodine.

"Not a bad sort at heart," said Rayton, dishing the fried potatoes. "He
has had his troubles, I imagine, but when he is feeling right he is a
very agreeable companion."

"I like his room better nor his company," said the trapper.

A couple of hours later, when the three were smoking lazily by the
sitting-room fire, they were startled by the sounds of a vehicle and
horse tearing up to the house at top speed. Rayton and Turk got quickly
to their feet. The front door flew open and heavy boots banged along the
uncarpeted hall. Then the door of the room was flung wide, and David
Marsh burst in. His right arm was bandaged and slung, but in his left
hand he held a heavy stick.

"Have you seen that skunk, Dick Goodine?" he cried. "My camp on
Teakettle Brook's burnt to the ground! Oh, there you are!"

By this time Mr. Banks and Goodine were also on their feet. Marsh
started forward, with murder in his eyes, and his mouth twisted. Rayton
stepped in front of him.

"Kindly remember that you are in my house," said the Englishman quietly.
"Just stop where you are, please, and explain yourself."

"Get to hell out of my way!" cried David. "I ain't talkin' to you.
There's the sneak I'm after--the dirty coward who cut halfway through
my canoe pole, and then set my camp afire, stores and all! Let me at
him, you pie-faced Englishman!"




CHAPTER VIII

RAYTON GOES TO BORROW A SAUCEPAN


"What do you want of me, Davy Marsh?" demanded the trapper. "If you
think I cut your canoe pole, yer a fool, and if you say so, yer a liar!"

"And what is all this about your camp?" asked Rayton, wrenching the club
from David's hand. "Keep cool, and tell us about it."

"By----!" cried the guide, "I'd knock the stuffin' out of the two o' ye
if I had the use o' my arm! You call me a liar, Dick Goodine? That's
easy--now--with my right arm in splints. And as you are so damn smart,
Rayton, can you tell me who burnt down my camp? And can you tell me who
cut that pole? There's a piece of it standin' in the corner--proof
enough to send a man to jail on!"

"This is the first I have heard of the camp," replied Rayton, "and I am
very sorry to hear of it now. When did it happen?"

"Happen?" cried Marsh bitterly. "It happened this very day. Peter Griggs
was out that way with a load of grub for one o' Harley's camps, this
very afternoon, and it was just burnin' good when he come to it. Hadn't
bin set more'n an hour, he cal'lated, but it was too far gone for him to
stop it. So he unhitched one of his horses and rode in to tell me,
hopin' I'd be able to catch the damn skunk who done it. And here he is,
by hell!"

"You are wrong there, Marsh," said Mr. Banks. "Goodine has been with us
since early yesterday morning, way over in the Long Barrens country--and
we didn't get home till this afternoon."

"We made camp near the Barrens last night," said Rayton.

"Is that the truth?" asked Marsh. "Cross your heart! So help you God!"

"It is the truth," said Rayton.

"Damn your cheek, Marsh, of course it is the truth," roared Banks.

Dick Goodine nodded. "Cross my heart. So help me God," he said.

The flush of rage slipped down from David's brow and face like a red
curtain. He moistened his lips with his tongue.

"Then it's the curse of them two marks on the card!" he whispered.
"It's the curse of them two red crosses!"

"Rot!" exclaimed Mr. Banks. "Just because Goodine didn't fire your camp,
you jump to the conclusion that the devil did it. Rot!"

"There's nobody else would do it but Dick Goodine," returned David
sullenly, "and if you say he didn't, well then--but lookee here! Who cut
half through that pole? Goodine did that, anyhow! Molly Canadian told me
where she found it. You can't git out of that, Dick Goodine!"

"That's so?" replied Dick. "You'd best go home and take a pill, Davy."

"Molly told us where she found it, too," said Rayton. "I call it a
mighty clever piece of spruce, to crawl out of the eddy at the tail of
the rapid, and lie down on top of a flat rock. How does it look to you,
Marsh?"

David frowned, and glanced uncertainly at Mr. Banks.

"That's queer," he admitted, "but I guess it don't alter the fact that
the pole had bin cut. Look at it! It was cut halfway through! And
there's the man who cut it, say what you please! He was the last but
myself to take it in his hands."

"I was the last, but you, to handle it afore it was broke," replied
Dick Goodine calmly, "but somebody else has bin at it _since it broke_.
Who fished it out o' the river and laid it on the rock, high and dry,
for Molly Canadian to find? When you know that, David Marsh, you'll know
who made the cut in it. But one thing I'll tell you--I didn't do it. If
I'd wanted to smash yer durned silly arm, or yer neck, I'd have done it
with my hands. So don't call me any more names or maybe I'll get so mad
as to forget yer not in shape to take a lickin'. That's all--except I'm
sorry yer havin' a run o' bad luck."

"Keep yer sorrow for them as wants it," replied Marsh, and left the
house.

"That young man shows up very badly when things go wrong with him,"
remarked Mr. Banks mildly. "Trouble seems to rattle him hopelessly.
Suppose we turn in."

"Guess I'll be steppin' home, gentlemen, if you don't mean to hunt
to-morrow," said the trapper.

"Better stay the night, Dick. It is late--and a long walk to your
place--and we want you to help us skin and clean Mr. Banks' moose head
in the morning," said Rayton.

So Goodine remained.

On the following morning, while the New York sportsman and the trapper
were busy over the intricate job of removing the hide from the moose
head, and cleaning the skull, Rayton invented an excuse for going over
to the Harley place. Since Jim Harley's pressing invitation he had made
three visits and had talked with Nell Harley three times. Never before
had he ventured to show himself in the morning. Those three visits,
however, had fired him with recklessness. Clocks stop for lovers--and
Reginald Baynes Rayton was a lover. He was not aware of it, but the fact
remains. He did not know what was the matter with him. He felt a mighty
friendship for Jim Harley. So, having told Banks and Goodine that he
wanted to borrow a saucepan of a very particular size, he made his way
across the settlement by road and field, wood and pasture. He was within
sight of the big farmhouse when old Captain Wigmore stepped from a
thicket of spruces and confronted him.

"Good morning, Reginald," said the captain. "Where are you bound for so
early?"

"Good morning," returned the Englishman. "I'm out to borrow a saucepan."

"So. Who from?"

"I think Mrs. Harley has just what I want."

"I haven't a doubt of it, Reginald. As I'm going that way myself, I'll
step along with you. But it's a long walk, my boy, every time you want
to use a saucepan. You had better buy one for yourself."

Rayton laughed, and the two advanced elbow to elbow.

"I hear," said the captain, "that poor young Marsh is up to his neck in
the waters of tribulation. His luck, in the past, has always been of the
best. It's a remarkably queer thing, don't you think so?"

"His luck was too good to last, that is all," replied Rayton. "One
cannot expect to have everything work out right forever--especially a
chap like Marsh, who has a way with him that is not attractive. I think
he has an enemy."

"I saw him this morning," said Wigmore, "and what do you think he is
worrying about now?"

"Heaven knows!"

"He has given up the idea that young Goodine is persecuting him, and now
lays all his troubles to the score of the devil. He broods over those
two little marks on that card that was dealt to him during our game of
poker. I don't believe he slept a wink last night. Jim's story
concerning the past history of those crosses has done its work. The
poor fellow is so badly shaken, that when he is out he's afraid the sky
may fall upon him, and when he's indoors, he is anxious about the room.
He is a coward at heart, you know--and it does not do for a coward to
consider himself in love with Nell Harley."

Rayton blushed quickly, and laughed his polite but meaningless laugh.

"I suppose not," he said. "None but the brave, you know."

"Exactly, Reginald. You are not such a fool as you--well, we'll say
sound, for you don't look like a fool. No offense is meant, my dear boy.
Fact is, I'm your very sincere admirer, and I should like to hear what
you think of that marked card, that turned up the other night at your
little party."

"I think it was nothing more than a queer chance."

"You believe Jim's story? You believe all that about his mother and
grandmother?"

"Yes, of course; but I think what happened the other night was just
chance."

"But you must admit, Reginald, that David Marsh, who received the marked
card, has had a peck of trouble served to him since that night."

"Yes. That is more queer chance--a very strange coincidence."

"You are a firm believer in chance, evidently. Or is it that you call
everything chance that you can't explain?"

Reginald sighed profoundly. "Chance," he said--"why, chance is chance.
It was chance that you and I met this morning. It was just chance that
David's luck should turn, or that some one with a grudge against him
should get busy, just after that marked card turned up."

Old Wigmore smiled and nodded.

"I, too, am a great believer in what you call chance," he said. "But
here we are, my boy. I see Miss Harley on the veranda, in a very
becoming and seasonable jacket of red wool. No doubt she'll be able to
find you a saucepan. Good morning, Reginald."

Captain Wigmore lifted his hat to the young woman on the veranda, and
then turned aside and moved briskly away. Rayton also lifted his hat,
but he continued to advance. Upon reaching the steps leading up to the
veranda he uttered a choking sound of embarrassment and concern, for it
was quite evident that Nell Harley had been weeping recently. But the
right to refer to this lamentable fact was not his. He must hide his
pity and tender curiosity.

"Good morning, Miss Harley. Isn't it a ripping morning for the time of
year?" he said.

"I am afraid it is going to rain," she replied.

"Of course," agreed Rayton, somewhat abashed, and glancing up at the
gray sky. "That's what I meant, you know. Rain's just what we need. It
will keep the frost off for a while longer, don't you think so?"

"Oh, _please_ don't talk about the weather, Mr. Rayton. I feel too--too
worried to talk about the weather."

"Worried!" exclaimed the young man. "I am sorry. Is there anything I can
do, Miss Harley? If so, just name it, please. I'd be delighted, you
know. May--may I ask what is the trouble?"

"Please come in. There is a fire in the sitting room. Come in, if you
can spare the time, for I want to tell you all about it--though I
suppose you know already."

Reginald followed her into the sitting room and took a seat across the
glowing hearth from her. He felt torn by her undisclosed trouble, and
bewildered by his own good fortune. He forgot to inquire after Jim and
Mrs. Harley, and the saucepan of very particular dimensions fled from
his mind. He sat in a low chair and gazed anxiously and expectantly at
Nell Harley. She sat with her elbow on her knee, her round chin on the
heel of her hand, and the shadow of retrospection over her bright, pale
face. Her eyes were lowered, but presently, and it seemed to him as
suddenly as a flash of lightning, she raised them to his glance.

"It is about that card I am worrying so," she said. "I have heard all
about it--about the card that was dealt to David Marsh with the two
little red crosses drawn upon the face of it. Already he has broken his
arm, lost his canoe, and had his camp burned down. It is terrible--and I
am frightened. I know the tradition, and believe it fully. Jim does not
like to talk about it, and Kate thinks it is all nonsense, though she is
too kind to actually say so. But I _know_ that every word of the old
story is true. It frightens me. Do you believe that--that the curse is
still following us--or does it all seem utterly ridiculous to you?"

Reginald turned his eyes away from her face with a visible effort, gazed
into the heart of the fire for a moment or two, studied the pattern of
the rug at his feet, and inspected the ceiling. His glance returned to
her face, held for a moment, then veered in panic to the window.

"Of course I believe the story that Jim told to me," he said, "and I
consider it a--a very remarkable story--and terribly sad, too; but it
was the work of man, or men, of course. There was nothing supernatural
about it. An enemy--a rival--used those red marks on a card in each
case, as a warning. First it was the Spanish count, and next it was that
Mr. Jackson. But now, in Samson's Mill Settlement--why, I feel quite
sure it is nothing but chance. Nobody but Jim knew of that family story,
and he certainly did not mark the card. And--and the conditions are not
right. At least, that's how it looks to me."

"The conditions?" she queried softly.

Rayton shot a brief, but imploring glance at her.

"What I mean is--ah--why should David Marsh get the card? I hope--I mean
I can't see--ah--I can't see any association between a chap like David
and----"

He fell silent, became very red, and blinked at the fire.

"Please go on," she whispered. "_Please_ tell me what you think, for I
know you are honest, fearless and sane, Mr. Rayton. You must forgive me
for speaking so frankly--but that is what Jim says of you. You were
saying that you cannot see any connection between David Marsh and--and
what?"

Reginald took a deep breath and squared his shoulders.

"Between Marsh and those others who received the marked cards," he said.
"First, it was the young sailor, the chap in the navy--the Spaniard's
winning rival. Next it was your father--a man of character and--and
breeding. Now David Marsh gets the card! That seems absurd to me. It
seems like a man going out to kill a partridge with an elephant gun.
It--it does not look to me like a continuation of the--the same idea at
all."

"Why not? Please be quite frank with me. Why does it seem different?"

"But really, Miss Harley, I--I have no right to air my--my opinions."

"I want you to. I beg you to. I am sure your opinions will help me."

"If anything I can say will make you feel easier, then I'll--I'll go
ahead. What I'm driving at is, that the navy chap was the kind of chap
your grandmother might have become--ah, very fond of. Perhaps she was.
He was a serious proposition. So with your father. The others who were
fond of your mother saw in him a real rival--a dangerous man. But--it is
not so with Marsh. He is not big. He is not strong. The truth is, if you
forgive me for saying so, there is no danger of--of your caring for a
chap like David Marsh. There! So the case is not like the others, and
the old idea is not carried out. Fate, or the rival, or whatever it is,
has made a stupid mistake."

He glanced at the girl as he ceased speaking. Her clear face was flushed
to a tender pink, and her eyes were lowered.

"There is a good deal of truth in what you say, Mr. Rayton," she
murmured. "It sounds like very clear reasoning to me. And you are right
in--in believing that I do not care at all for David Marsh, in the way
you mean. But may we not go even farther in disproving any connection
between this case and the other two?"

For the fraction of a second her glance lifted and encountered his.

"Even if David happened to correspond with that young sailor of long
ago, or with my dear father, the rival is missing," she said
uncertainly. "The rivals were the most terrible features of the other
cases."

Rayton got nervously to his feet, then sank down again.

"There would be plenty of rivals--of a kind," he said. "That is the
truth, as you must know. But like poor Marsh, none is--would be--worth
considering. So, you see, fate, or whatever it is that plays this game,
is playing stupidly. That is why I think it nothing but chance, in this
case--the whole thing nothing but the maddest chance."

"You have eased my mind very greatly," she said.

The Englishman bowed and rose from his chair. "I am glad," he said
simply. "Now I must be starting for home. I left Banks and Goodine
working over a moose head that Banks got yesterday."

"You do not think Dick Goodine set fire to David's camp, do you? There
is bad blood between them, you know," she said anxiously.

"He was with us all yesterday and the day before," he answered, "so I
knew he had nothing to do with it."

At the door the young woman said, "I am very glad you came over this
morning." And then, with an air of sudden awakening to the commonplaces
of life, "Did you come for anything in particular? To see Jim, perhaps?"
she asked.

"No. Oh, no," he answered, hat in hand. "I just came--that is, I just
happened along."

He was halfway home when he remembered the saucepan.




CHAPTER IX

RAYTON CONFESSES


Old Timothy Fletcher, Captain Wigmore's servant and companion, was more
of a mystery to the people of Samson's Mill Settlement than the captain
himself. He was not as sociable as his master, kept to the house a great
deal, and moved with a furtive air whenever he ventured abroad. In
speech he was reserved to such an extent that he seldom addressed a word
to anybody but Wigmore, and in manner he was decidedly unpleasant. He
was neither liked nor understood by his neighbors. He did not care a rap
what the people thought of him, and yet, with all his queerness and
unsociability, he possessed many common human traits. He served the
captain faithfully, had a weakness for rye whisky and Turkish
cigarettes--weaknesses which he indulged on the sly--and spent much of
his time in the perusal of sentimental fiction.

The afternoon of the day on which Mr. Rayton went across the fields to
borrow a saucepan was bright and warm. The morning had promised rain,
but a change of wind had given to late autumn a few more hours of magic,
unseasonable warmth and glow. Timothy Fletcher, shod with felt, went to
the door of the captain's bedroom and assured himself that the worthy
gentleman was deep in his after-luncheon nap. Then he tiptoed to his own
chamber, produced a paper-covered novel and a box of cigarettes from a
locked trunk, and crept downstairs again. In the kitchen he changed his
felt-soled slippers for a pair of boots. He crossed the garden, the
little pasture beyond, and entered a patch of young firs and spruces. He
walked swiftly and furtively, until he came to a little sun-filled
clearing, on a gently sloping hillside. Here he found his favorite seat,
which was a dry log lying near a big poplar. He seated himself on the
log, leaned back against the poplar, lit a fat cigarette, and opened the
book.

For a whole hour Timothy read steadily, chapter after chapter, and
smoked four cigarettes. Then he placed the book face down upon his knee.
The sun was warm and the air soft and fragrant. He closed his eyes,
opened them with an effort, closed them again. His head sank back and
settled slightly to the left. The book slid from his knee. But he gave
it no heed.

He awoke, struggling violently, but impotently. He opened his eyes upon
darkness. He cried out furiously, and his voice was beaten thunderously
back into his own ears by an enveloping blanket. He knew it for a
blanket by the weight and feeling of it. His back was still against the
familiar poplar tree, but now it was pressed to the trunk by something
that crossed his chest. His hands were bound to his sides. His ankles
were gripped together.

Now it happened that a large widow, named Mrs. Beesley, came to the
little hillside clearing just before sunset. She had been hunting
through the woods all the afternoon for an herb that enjoys the
reputation, in this country, of being a panacea for all ailments of the
stomach. Now she was on her way home.

Rounding the big poplar, she beheld a shapeless, blanket-swathed,
rope-bound form lumped against the trunk. She did not see the ropes
clearly, nor fully comprehend the blanket; in fact she received only a
general impression of something monstrous, bulky, terrific. She uttered
a shrill scream, and, for a few seconds, stood spellbound. A choking
sound, muffled and terrible, came from the shapeless bulk, and one end
of it began to sway and the other to twist and wag. Mrs. Beesley turned
and ran for her very life.

Instinct, rather than reason, directed Mrs. Beesley's fleeing feet
toward the clearings and farmsteads of the settlement. She left the
haunted woods behind her, crossed a lumpy pasture at an amazing pace,
sprang into the middle of a brush fence, and fought through without a
halt, sighted a house with a male figure in the foreground, and kicked
her way toward these signs of protection with such high action that her
elastic-sided boots acknowledged themselves frankly, and Captain
Wigmore's suspicions of white stockings were confirmed. She arrived with
such force as to send the frail old captain reeling backward across an
empty flower bed. Following him, she reclined upon the mold.

"Bless my soul!" cried the captain. "Why, it is Mrs. Beesley! My dear
Mrs. Beesley, what the devil is the matter with you? Allow me to help
you to your feet. You'll ruin your gown in that bed, I'm sure. Did you
see a bear?"

She had no breath for words, just then, and her legs felt as if they had
melted. Wigmore possessed himself of her fat hands, set his heels in
the edge of the flower bed, and pulled. He suggested a small terrier
worrying a large and sleepy pig. Presently he desisted from his efforts,
retreated a few paces, and wiped his face with his handkerchief.

"Collect yourself, my dear Mrs. Beesley," he pleaded. "I'm afraid you'll
catch your death sitting there. Come now, try to tell me all about the
bear--and try to rise."

The widow found her voice, though she did not move.

"It weren't a b'ar, captain," she cried. "Sakes alive! No b'ar 'u'd
scare me like that. Don't know what to call it, captain. The devil, I
reckon--or a ghost, maybe--or a annerchrist. You better git yer gun,
captain, and go back and take a look. Oh, lor'! Oh, sakes alive! I never
thought to see the day Mary Beesley 'u'd jump fences like a breechy
steer!"

"Calm yourself, Mrs. Beesley," returned old Wigmore, "and tell me where
you saw this creature. Did it chase you?"

"It was in the little clearin' where the spring is," replied the widow.
"No, it didn't chase me, captain, as far's I know. I didn't look 'round
to see. It jes' growled and wiggled--and then I lit out, captain, and
made no more to-do about a fence than I would about crossin' a hooked
mat on the kitchen floor."

"Come in and sit down, Mrs. Beesley," said Wigmore. "I'll get my man
Timothy and go up to the spring and look 'round. I haven't a doubt about
it being a bear."

Wigmore went through the house shouting vainly for Timothy Fletcher.
Then he went out to the road and caught sight of Benjamin Samson in the
distance. He whistled on his fingers and waved a hand violently to the
miller. Benjamin came to him as fast as his weight allowed.

"What's bitin' you, cap'n?" he asked.

"There is something by the spring up in the little clearing," said
Wigmore--"something that frightened Mrs. Beesley, and growled and wagged
itself. She is in the house, recovering from her fright. She ran like a
deer."

"Then I'll bet it wasn't a man up by the spring," said Benjamin.

The captain let this mild attempt at humor pass without notice.

"I want to go up and take a look 'round," he said, "but I can't find
Timothy anywhere. It may be a bear--and I am an old man. Will you come
along with me, Benjamin?"

"Sure. If you can lend me a gun," replied Mr. Samson.

They found a shot-gun, slipped two cartridges loaded with buckshot into
the breech, bade Mrs. Beesley sit quiet and be of good heart, and set
out to investigate the little hillside clearing. It was now dusk. The
sun had slipped from sight, and the shadows were deep in the woods. The
captain carried a lighted lantern, and Benjamin the ready fowling piece.

They soon reached the poplar tree and the blanket-swathed figure bound
against it. By lantern light it looked more grotesque and monstrous than
by day, and Mr. Samson came within an ace of taking a snap shot at it,
and then beating a hasty retreat. The captain was too quick for him,
however, noticed the twitch of the miller's arm, and gripped him by the
wrist.

"It's tied fast, whatever it is," he said.

"Don't you see the ropes? Come on, Benjamin, and keep a grip on your
nerve. Here, let me take the gun!"

"I ain't scart," replied Samson thickly. "It gave me a start for a
second, that's all."

They approached the shapeless figure cautiously.

"Who are you?" cried Wigmore.

The thing twisted and squirmed, and a muffled, choking, bestial sound
came from it.

"I'll bet a dollar it's a man," said Benjamin. "Now what kind o' trick
is this, I'd like to know? Maybe there's bin murder done. There's bin
too many queer tricks 'round here lately to suit me."

"It is tied up in a blanket," said the captain. "Feel it, Benjamin, and
find out what it is."

"Not me," returned Samson. "I guess it's only a man, but I ain't
particular about feelin' of it. You go ahead, cap'n. I'll hold the light
for you."

Old Wigmore stepped closer to the blanketed form and touched it gingerly
with his left hand. It squirmed beneath his fingers, and again gave
utterance to that amazing sound.

"Yes, it's a human being," said the captain. And then, "Bless my soul,
look at his feet! It's poor Timothy Fletcher, by Heaven! Quick,
Benjamin, lend a hand here! Cut that rope, man!"

In less than half a minute old Timothy was free. Lacking the support of
the rope that had circled his chest and the tree, he tipped forward and
slid heavily to the ground. The captain knelt beside him.

"Run to the house and get some brandy," he ordered. "You'll find some in
my bedroom, behind the wardrobe. Make haste, Benjamin!"

"Well," replied Benjamin Samson, "I reckon I don't have to, cap'n. Queer
thing, cap'n, but I happen to have a drop o' rye whisky in my pocket.
Ain't carried sech a thing for years and years--but I've had a spell o'
toothache lately and t' only thing does it any good's rye whisky. I hold
some in my mouth now and again--and always spit it out, of course. Here
you are, cap'n, and welcome."

Wigmore twisted out the cork and held the bottle to Timothy's lips.
Timothy's eyes were shut, but his lips were open. His throat seemed to
be in working order.

"He takes it like a baby takes its milk," said Benjamin. "I guess he
ain't bin murdered, after all. There! I reckon he's had about all that's
good for him. Wake up, Mr. Fletcher, and tell us all about it."

"Tell me who did this, my good Timothy, and I'll make it hot for him,"
said Wigmore. "When did it happen, my worthy friend?"

"This here country's gettin' that lawless it ain't fit fer honest men
like us to live in no longer," said Mr. Samson.

Timothy growled and sat up. He glared at Benjamin, then turned his gaze
upon his master.

"Ah! You feel better!" exclaimed the captain. "I am glad of it, my
trusty friend. Tell me, now, when and how did this outrageous thing
happen?"

"I'll trouble ye for another drop of that tonic, Mr. Samson," said
Timothy.

"I reckon not," returned the miller. "Doctor Nash says as how too much
is a long sight worse nor too little."

"Then where's my book?" demanded Timothy. "And my cigarettes?"

"You have not answered my questions, my dear fellow," said the captain.

"Chuck it!" returned the old servant. "I ain't in the mood for answerin'
fool questions."

"I fear his nerves are badly shaken," whispered the captain to the
miller. "We must get him home and put him to bed."

"But you ain't intendin' to leave the ropes and blanket behind,
surely!" exclaimed Benjamin. He stooped, picked up the blanket, and held
it to the light of the lantern. "Hah!" he cried. "It's my blanket! It's
my new hoss blanket, by gosh! I missed it fust, last Sunday. And the
rope's mine, too--my new hay rope, all cut to bits. I'll have the law on
whoever done this, sure's my name's Benjamin Samson."

"_Your_ blanket?" queried Captain Wigmore. "_Your_ blanket and rope? But
no, Benjamin. I don't suspect you, my friend, for I know you to be an
honest man. But others--people who don't know you as I do--might think
you were the person who tied Timothy to the tree."

"Chuck it!" growled Mr. Fletcher, picking up the lantern and limping
away.

Thanks to Mrs. Beesley and Benjamin Samson, the story of the mysterious
attack upon old Timothy Fletcher soon spread to the farthest outskirts
of the settlement. Some inspired person connected this with the burning
of David Marsh's camp, and it became a general belief that some
desperate character was at work in the country. Samson suggested an
escaped convict, but where escaped from he could not say. Timothy looked
more unpleasant than ever, and kept his jaws together like the jaws of
a spring fox trap. He did not seem to enjoy his position in the
limelight. Mrs. Beesley found herself a heroine for a little while, but
this did not make amends for the speedy ruination of her dreams
concerning Captain Wigmore.

She had expected a warm continuation and a quick and romantic
development of the friendly--aye, more than friendly--relations
commenced by that adventure. But, alas, it had all ended as suddenly as
it had commenced. The poor woman sometimes wondered if she had made a
mistake in sitting for so long in the captain's flower bed.

"Men are queer critters," she said. "The late Mr. Beesley was touchy as
a cat about them little things, and maybe the captain's the same. But he
was that friendly and perlite, I really did think his intentions was
serious."

Mr. Banks was keenly interested in Timothy's adventure. He talked to
Captain Wigmore about it for fully an hour.

Two days after the mysterious, and apparently meaningless attack upon
Wigmore's servant, the first snow of the coming winter descended upon
the wilderness. Jim Harley had two full crews of lumbermen in the woods
by now, but was himself spending half his time in the settlement. David
Marsh's arm was still in splints, and Dick Goodine had not yet gone out
to his bleak hunting grounds, beyond the fringes of the made roads and
buckwheat-stubble belt.

Dick spent much of his time with Mr. Banks and Reginald Rayton. As for
Mr. Harvey P. Banks, he seemed to have forgotten both his business and
his distant home. He had still one hundred of those long cigars, and a
tin box of fat cigarettes--and he knew he was welcome to his bed and
board. He felt a warm friendship for his host and the Harleys, and a
deep interest in all the other people of the place. Captain Wigmore and
his old servant excited his curiosity like the first--or last--volume of
an old-style novel. They suggested a galloping story; but Benjamin
Samson, David Marsh, and the others suggested nothing more exciting than
character studies. Doctor Nash did not interest the New Yorker at all,
but of course the doctor could not realize this fact, and persisted in
considering himself to be Mr. Banks' only congenial companion in the
neighborhood.

On the day of the first snow Dick Goodine walked over to Rayton's farm
to borrow a drawknife. He was making an extra pair of snowshoes, and
overhauling his outfit for the winter's trapping. Banks and Turk were
afield, looking for hares and grouse; but Dick found the Englishman in
his red barn, threshing buckwheat. Rayton threw his flail aside and the
two shook hands.

"Have you sech a thing as a drawknife, Mr. Rayton?"

"Two of them, Dick. I use them mostly to cut my fingers with."

"Can I have the loan of one for a few days?"

"I'll give you one, Dick. You'll be doing me a kindness to take it and
keep it, old chap, for I am a regular duffer with edged tools."

He found the knife and spent ten minutes in forcing it upon the trapper
as a gift. At last Dick accepted it.

"But I tell you right now, Mr. Rayton," he said, "I'll git mad if you
try givin' me a horse, or a cow, or your farm. You've already give me
something of pretty near everything you own. It ain't right."

Rayton laughed. Then his face became suddenly very grave.

"See here, Dick, I've something serious to say to you," he said.
"Something I've been worrying over for the last day or two. You've
always been honest with me--the soul of honesty--so I must be honest
with you."

"What have I bin doin'?" asked the trapper uneasily.

"You? Oh, you haven't done anything that you shouldn't, old man. I am
thinking of myself. You told me, a little while ago, that you
were--ah--very fond of Miss Harley. But you told me in such a way, old
man, as to lead me to think that--that you didn't believe yourself to
have--much chance--in the quarter."

"That's right, Mr. Rayton," replied the trapper frankly. "I knew there
wasn't any chance for me, and I know it still. I said that _you_ was the
kind of man she'd ought to marry, some day. I'm a good trapper, and I
try to be an honest friend to them as act friendly to me; but I'm just a
tough, ignorant bushwhacker. She ain't my kind--nor David Marsh's
kind--and neither is Jim. She's more like you and Mr. Banks."

Rayton blushed deeply.

"My dear chap, you must not talk like that," he said. "You live in the
bush, of course, but so do I, and so do all of us. But--but what I want
to say, Dick, is this: I am--I am in love with Miss Harley!"

"Good for you!" exclaimed the trapper. He extended his hand. "Lay it
there! And good luck to you!"




CHAPTER X

RED CROSSES AGAIN


"I am investigating the mysteries of Samson's Mill Settlement along
lines of my own," said Harvey P. Banks. "My system of detection is not
perfect yet, but it is good enough to go ahead with. So far I have not
nailed anything down, but my little hammer is ready, I can tell you. I
am full of highly colored suspicions, and there is one thing I am ready
to swear to."

"What is that?" asked Reginald Baynes Rayton.

"Just this, Reginald. I'll eat my boots--and they cost me twelve
plunks--if the burning of young Marsh's camp and the attack upon old
Timothy Fletcher are not parts of the same game. I don't see any
connection, mind you, but I'll swear it is so. I have two pieces of this
picture puzzle on the table, and I am waiting for more. I know that
these two pieces belong to the same picture."

"And what about the marked card?" inquired Rayton. "Is it part of your
puzzle?"

"Certainly. It is the title of the picture. But I want more pieces, and
just at this stage I need another game of poker. Can you get the same
bunch of players together for to-night--and Dick Goodine?"

"I'll try. If we both set to work we can make the round this afternoon.
Jim Harley is home, I know. Why do you want Dick? I give you my word, H.
P., that you'll not find him one of the crooked pieces of your puzzle
picture."

"Right you are, son! But he has sharp eyes, and as he is our friend it
would not be polite to give a party and leave him out. He needn't play.
Somebody must sit out, anyway, or we'll have too many for a good game,
but he can talk, and look on, and help burn tobacco."

"Good! Then we must get Goodine, Nash, Wigmore, Marsh, Jim Harley, and
Benjamin Samson."

"Never mind Samson. We don't need him. He is harmless and hopeless--and
one too many. Also, he has promised Mrs. Samson never to stay out again
after ten o'clock at night."

"All serene. We'd better start out with our invites right after grub.
And as the roads are bad we may as well ride. You can have Buller and
I'll take Bobs. Who do you want to call on?"

"I'll see Nash and Wigmore, and leave the others to you."

So, after the midday meal, they saddled the two farm horses and set out.
Mr. Banks rode straight to Captain Wigmore's house. The air was still
mild and the sky was clouded. About four inches of slushy snow lay upon
the half-frozen ruts of the roads. The New Yorker hitched Buller in an
open carriage shed, and hammered with the butt of his whip upon the
front door. He waited patiently for nearly ten minutes, then hammered
again. This time the summons brought old Timothy Fletcher, looking even
more sullen than usual and with his gray-streaked hair standing up like
the crest of some grotesque fowl. His eyes had the appearance of being
both sharp and dull at the same time. They showed inner points, glinting
like ice, and an outer, blinking film like the shadow of recent sleep.
For several seconds he stood with the door no more than six inches ajar,
staring and blinking at the caller, his wind-tanned brow forbidding, but
his lower face as expressionless as a panel of the door.

"Who d'ye want, sir?" he inquired at last, in a grudging voice.

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Banks. "I really thought you were asleep,
Timothy. I want to speak to the captain for a few minutes. Is he at
home?"

Timothy Fletcher lowered his staring eyes for an instant, then raised
them again, blinking owlishly. The glint in their depths brightened, and
took on sharper edges.

"What d'ye want to speak to him about?" he asked suspiciously.

"I'll tell that to your master," replied Mr. Banks blandly.

"He ain't at home."

"Not at home? Guess again, my good man."

"I tell ye, he ain't at home!"

"Not so fast," said the sportsman coolly, and with astonishing swiftness
he advanced his heavily booted right foot, and thrust it across the
threshold. The door nipped it instantly.

"It is not polite to slam doors in the faces of your master's friends,"
he said.

Then he threw all his weight against the door, flinging it wide open and
hurling Timothy Fletcher against the wall.

"I don't like your manners," he said. "I intend to keep my eye on you. I
give you fair warning, Timothy Fletcher."

The old fellow stood against the wall, breathing heavily, but in no wise
abashed. He grinned sardonically.

"Warning?" he gasped. "Ye warn _me_! Chuck it!"

Mr. Banks halted and gazed at him, noting the narrow, heaving chest and
gray face.

"I hope I have not hurt you. I opened the door a trifle more violently
than I intended," he said.

Fletcher did not answer. Banks glanced up the stairs and beheld Captain
Wigmore standing at the top and smiling down at him. He turned sharply
to the servant. "There!" he whispered. "Just as I suspected! You were
lying."

The old fellow twisted his gray face savagely. That was his only answer.

Timothy retired to the back of the house as Captain Wigmore descended
the stairs. The captain was in fine spirits. He clasped his visitor's
hand and patted his shoulder.

"Come into my den," he cried. "What'll you have? Tea, whisky, sherry?
Give it a name, my boy."

"A drop of Scotch, if you have it handy," replied the caller. "But I
came over just for a moment, captain, to see if you can join us
to-night in a little game of poker."

"Delighted! Nothing I'd like better. We've been dull as ditch water
lately," answered the captain, as he placed a glass and decanter before
his visitor. "Just a moment," he added. "There is no water--and there is
no bell in this room. Timothy has a strong objection to bells."

Wigmore left the room, returning in a minute with a jug of water. He
closed the door behind him.

"Same crowd, I suppose," he said, "and the cards cut at eight o'clock."

Banks nodded, and sipped his whisky and water. "Yes, about eight," he
answered. "We don't keep city hours."

"Do you expect the marked card to turn up again?" asked Captain Wigmore,
fixing him with a keen glance.

The New Yorker looked slightly disconcerted, but only for a fraction of
a second.

"Yes, I am hoping so," he admitted. "I want to see those marks. Do you
think there is any chance of the thing working to-night?"

"That is just what I want to know," returned the captain. "If the devil
is at the bottom of that trick, as Jim Harley would have us all
believe, I see no reason why he should neglect us to-night. But,
seriously, I am convinced that we might play a thousand games and never
see those two red crosses on the face of a card again. It was chance, of
course, and that the Harleys should have that family tradition all ready
was a still more remarkable chance."

Mr. Banks nodded. "We'll look for you about eight o'clock," he said, and
then, very swiftly for a man of his weight, he sprang from his chair and
yanked open the door. There, with his feet at the very threshold, stood
Timothy Fletcher. Banks turned to the captain with a gesture that drew
the old man's attention to the old servant's position.

"I'd keep my eye on this man, if I were you," he said. "I have caught
him both at lying and eavesdropping to-day."

"Timothy, what the devil do you mean by such behavior?" cried Wigmore
furiously.

Timothy leered, turned, and walked slowly away.

Mr. Banks mounted his horse and set out for Doctor Nash's at a
bone-wrenching trot.

"I'll bet a dollar old Fletcher is at the bottom of the whole business,"
he murmured. "I wonder where Wigmore picked him up. He looks like
something lifted from the bottom of the sea." During the ride to the
doctor's, and throughout the homeward journey, his mind was busy with
Timothy Fletcher. When he reached home he told something of his new
suspicion to Rayton.

"How could that poor old chap have got at that card?" asked Rayton. "He
has never been inside my sitting room in his life."

"That is just what you think, Reginald," replied Mr. Banks. "But we'll
soon know all about it, you take my word. I am on a hot scent!"

Jim Harley was the first of the company to arrive. He looked worried,
but said nothing about his anxieties. Next came young Marsh, with his
right arm in a sling and a swagger in his stride. Dick Goodine and
Captain Wigmore appeared together, having met at the gate. The captain
wore a cutaway coat, a fancy waistcoat, and a white silk cravat fastened
with a pearl pin. His whiskers were combed and parted to a wish, his
gray hair was slick as the floor of a roller-skating rink, and his
smiling lips disclosed his flashing "store" teeth. He was much merrier
and smarter than on the night of the last game.

Doctor Nash was still to come.

"We'll give him fifteen minutes' grace," said Rayton, "and if he does
not turn up by then we'll sit in to the game without him."

"He is trying to be fashionable," said Captain Wigmore. "Poor fellow!"

Banks produced his cigars and cigarettes. David Marsh drew his chair
close up to Dick Goodine's and began to talk in guarded tones.

"D'ye know, Dick, I'm mighty upset," he whispered. "I'd feel easier if I
knew you'd done me dirt than the way I do now. I can stand up to a
man--but this here mysterious business ain't the kind o' thing nobody
can stand up to."

"Scart?" inquired Dick.

"No, I ain't scart. Just oneasy. D'ye reckon them little crosses will
turn up to-night?"

"Guess not. That sort o' thing don't happen more'n once."

"Will you swear you didn't cut my canoe pole, Dick--so help you God!"

"So help me God, I didn't cut it nor harm it in any way. And I don't
know who did."

"I believe you--now. I guess there's something worse nor you on my
trail. If that marked card turns up to-night, and comes to me, I'll git
out o' the country. That'll be the cheapest thing to do, I guess."

"I wouldn't if I was you. I'd just lay low and keep my eyes skinned."

Then Doctor Nash arrived, and all pulled their chairs to the table
except Dick Goodine. They drew for cards and Mr. Banks produced an ace.
The pack was swiftly shuffled, cut, and dealt. David Marsh put his left
hand on the table, touched his cards, hesitated for a moment, and then
sprang to his feet. His face was twisted with a foolish grin.

"I guess not!" he exclaimed. "It ain't good enough for me."

The captain, having settled down to business, had lost his sweet and
playful temper.

"What's that?" he snapped. "Not good enough! What's not good enough?"

"The risk ain't good enough," replied Marsh, sullenly and yet with an
attempt at lightness. "I don't like them red crosses. I've had enough of
'em, whoever works 'em--man or devil--he's cured me!"

"Cured you?" queried Jim Harley, glancing up from his hand.

"Yes, _cured_ me!" cried Marsh forcibly, "and I don't care who knows it.
I ain't 'shamed to say it, neither. I've broke my arm, lost a canoe,
and a camp--and a good job! Ain't that enough? I quit! I quit right
now."

"Do you mean you'll quit playing cards?" asked Rayton.

"I guess you know what I mean," retorted David. "And I guess Jim Harley
knows, too."

"Oh, shut up!" snapped old Wigmore. "We came here to play poker, not to
listen to you. Who sits in and takes this heroic gentleman's place?
Goodine, it's up to you."

"Don't care if I do," said the trapper; so he and David Marsh changed
seats.

The game went on for half an hour without any fuss. Doctor Nash was
winning. Then, after a throwdown, Rayton gathered up the old pack and
replaced them with a new.

"You are growing extravagant, Reginald," said the captain, glancing at
him keenly.

Rayton laughed.

"I hear Turk scratching," he said. "Excuse me for half a minute."

He went into the kitchen, and threw the old pack of cards into the
stove. He returned immediately to his place at the table and the game
went on. Nash's pile of blue chips dwindled steadily and Dick Goodine
began to stack up the red, white, and blue. Mr. Banks seemed to be
playing a slack game. Captain Wigmore played keenly and snapped at every
one. Rayton left his chair for a few seconds and placed glasses, a
decanter, and cold water on the table.

"Help yourselves," he said. "We'll have coffee, and something to eat,
later."

Captain Wigmore waved the liquor aside, but the others charged their
glasses. Goodine displayed three aces and scooped in a jack pot that had
stood secure and accumulating for several rounds.

"Hah, Davy, you dropped out too soon," said Nash. "You got cold feet at
the wrong time of day. Don't you wish, now, that you'd stayed in the
game?"

"Wouldn't risk it, doc--not even for a ten-dollar pot," replied Marsh.

"Bah!" exclaimed old Wigmore, as he cut the deck for Jim Harley. Jim
dealt. Rayton looked steadily at his five cards, then slipped them
together between thumb and finger, and tilted his chair well back from
the table.

"You look as if you'd been given something pretty good," said Captain
Wigmore.

"Not half bad," answered the Englishman quietly.

"On the side," said Nash, "I bet you a dollar, even, that I hold the
best hand--pat."

Rayton shook his head. "Not this time, Nash, if you don't mind," he
replied quietly. "I want to take cards."

"That's easily managed," persisted the doctor. "I want cards, too; but
we can lay our discards aside and show them later. Come, be a sport!
Thought all Englishmen were sports."

Rayton hesitated, flushing.

"Right-o!" he said. "But I'll not be what you call a sport on one
dollar! Twenty-five is my bet, Nash--even money. Come! How does that
suit you?"

"It doesn't suit me at all--thanks just the same," returned the doctor
sullenly.

"Perhaps you'll leave the English sporting instinct alone, after this,"
said Mr. Banks.

"For Heaven's sake, get on with the game!" cried old Wigmore.

All "came in" and took cards. Rayton asked for two, and though he did
not bet, he kept the five cards in his hand. Wigmore took the money,
this time.

"Supper," said the Englishman quickly, and gathered up all the cards
with swift hands, his own included. He entered the kitchen quickly, and
they heard him clattering about the stove.

After supper the game went on, with another fresh pack of cards. They
had been playing for about a quarter of an hour when Captain Wigmore
suddenly began to chuckle.

"What's the matter with you? Have you laid an egg?" asked Nash
insolently.

For a second the old man's face was twisted with white-hot rage and his
eyes fairly flamed upon the doctor. He trembled--then smiled calmly.

"Some one has, evidently," he said, and spread his five cards face-up
upon the table. He pointed at the ace of clubs with a lean finger. It
was marked with two little red crosses!

"You!" cried Jim Harley, staring incredulously from the card to the old
man and back again to the card.

Nash and David Marsh began to laugh uproariously. Goodine and Rayton
looked bewildered, and Banks scratched his head reflectively.

"That beats the band!" cried Nash, at last. "Jim, the spook who works
that family curse of yours must be going daffy. Good for you, captain!
There's life in the old dog yet! No wonder you are dressed up so
stylish."

He leaned halfway across the table, guffawing in the old man's face.

Wigmore's hands darted forward. One gripped Nash's necktie, and the
other darted into an inner pocket of his coat.

"Here! Drop it, you old devil!" cried the doctor.

Captain Wigmore sat back in his chair, laughing softly. He held
something in his hand--something that they had all seen him draw from
Nash's pocket.

"Gentlemen," he said, "look at this. It is another card marked with the
two red crosses. I took it from the pocket of our worthy young pill
roller. Who'd ever have thought that he was the mysterious indicator of
trouble--the warning of the gods--the instrument of fate?"

"You darned old fool!" cried Nash, "that is the same card that was dealt
to Davy Marsh last time we played. You know it as well as I do, you old
ape! Look at it. Look at the back of it. Here, Rayton, you take a look
at it."

"It is the same old card," said Rayton. "Nash took it away with him that
night."

"Ah! My mistake," said the captain mildly.

When the company left the house, Rayton called Jim Harley back.

"I can't make it out," he said, looking from Banks to Harley, "but I
want you chaps to know that two marked cards were dealt to me before
supper. I kept quiet and changed the pack each time."

Harley clutched the Englishman's shoulder.

"You!" he exclaimed, with colorless lips. "Twice! Is that true?"

"Yes, it's true; but it is nonsense, of course," returned the
Englishman.

"Don't worry, Jim," said Mr. Banks calmly. "The thing is all a fake--and
I mean to catch the faker before I leave Samson's Mill Settlement!"




CHAPTER XI

AN UNFORTUNATE MOMENT FOR THE DOCTOR


The morning after the second card party found Banks and Rayton eating an
early breakfast with good appetites. If Rayton felt uneasy, face and
manner showed nothing of it. The big New Yorker was in the highest
spirits. He had found an unfamiliar sport--a new form of hunting--a
twisted, mysterious trail, with the Lord knows what at the far end of
it. He was alert, quiet, smiling to himself. He ate five rashers of
bacon, drank three cups of coffee, and then lit a cigar.

"I'll have my finger on him within the week," he said, leaning back in
his chair.

The Englishman glanced up at him, and smiled.

"I do not think we should encourage the idiot by paying any further
attention to his silly tricks," he said. "Whoever he is, let him see
that he does not amuse or interest any one but himself. Then he'll get
tired and drop it. The whole thing is absolute foolishness, and the man
at the bottom of it is a fool."

"I mean to trail him, and pin him down, fool or no fool," replied Banks.
"I'll make him pay dear for his fooling, by thunder! He is having his
fun--and I mean to have mine."

Rayton laughed. "Go ahead and have your fun, old chap; but I tell you
that the more notice you pay his silly tricks, the more you tickle his
vanity."

"I'll tickle more than his vanity before I'm done with him," promised
Banks.

The two were washing the dishes, when the kitchen door opened, and Dick
Goodine stepped into the room.

"We're in for another spell o' soft weather," he said. "It's mild as
milk this mornin'. This little lick o' snow'll be all gone by noon. It
don't look as if I'll ever get into the woods with my traps."

He sat down, filled and lit his pipe, and put his feet on the hearth of
the cookstove.

"That was an all-fired queer thing about old Wigmore," he said. "All the
fools ain't dead yet, I reckon. Since the captain got that there card,
the thing don't look as serious to me as it did. Not by a long shot!
What d'you say, Mr. Banks?"

"You are right, Dick, according to your lights," replied the New
Yorker.

The trapper looked puzzled.

"He means that you don't know all the particulars of what happened last
night," said Rayton. "Captain Wigmore got the marked card, right enough,
after supper--but I got it twice, before supper. That is the puzzling
part of it, Dick."

The care-free smile fled from Goodine's handsome and honest countenance.
His dark cheeks paled, and a shadow, starting far down, came up to the
surface of his eyes.

"You!" he exclaimed. "Twice--before supper! That--that looks bad to me.
That's the worst yet."

"My dear chap, if the silly thing was dealt to me every night, and
chucked into my bedroom window every morning, it wouldn't be a jot less
silly," replied Rayton. "Some idiot, who has heard Jim Harley's story,
is trying to have some fun out of it. That is all. It amuses him
evidently, and doesn't hurt us."

Dick Goodine shook his head. "I guess it hurt David Marsh," he
said--"whatever it may be. It smashed his arm, an' pretty near drownded
him, an' burned his camp, an' about fifty dollars' worth o' gear an'
grub. That don't look much like fun to me--not like fun for the man who
gets the card, anyhow. I'll tell you right now, if ever it comes to me
I'll light out within the hour, an' hit the trail for my trappin'
grounds over beyond the back o' nowhere."

"Don't believe it, Dick."

"But that's just what I'd do all the same. It ain't natural. It's more
nor a game, I tell you--it's like something I've read about, somewheres
or other."

"You're wrong there, Dick," said Mr. Banks. "It is a game--a dangerous
one, maybe, but a game, for all that. I'll show you the player, one of
these days, as sure as my name is Harvey P. Banks! In the meantime,
Dick, I'll bet you five dollars that if you happened to be picked out to
receive those red marks, as Reginald has been picked out--for the same
reason, I mean, according to the family tradition--you'd not budge an
inch or back water half a stroke. You'd just put your finger to your
nose at the warning, as Reginald does, even if you thought Fate, family
curses, Spanish ghosts, old Jackson, and the devil were all on your
trail."

The color came back to the trapper's cheeks. He lowered his glance to
the toes of his steaming boots on the hearth of the stove, and shifted
uneasily in his chair.

"I guess yer right," he said huskily. "I guess I'd be brave enough to
face it, devil an' all, if I had that reason to be brave. But I ain't
got that reason, an' never will have--so I'm scart. I'm a durned
ignorant bushwhacker, I reckon. Anyhow, I'm scart."

Rayton placed a hand on the other's shoulder for a second.

"That is like you," he said. "You are more frightened about your friend
than you'll ever be about yourself. But cheer up, old man! I don't think
Fate will break any canoe poles on me."

"Fate!" repeated Mr. Banks, laughing merrily. "Oh, you are safe enough
from Fate, Reginald!"

But Dick Goodine shook his head.

During the morning, Rayton went over to the Harley place. The sun was
glowing with a heat as of September, and the snow was already a mixture
of slush and mud. Dick Goodine went about his business; and Mr. Banks
sat by the kitchen stove, smoking and struggling with his puzzle. Rayton
found Jim Harley in the barnyard. Jim's greeting was emotional. He
gripped the Englishman's hand, and looked steadily into his face with
troubled eyes.

"I was just going over to see you," he said. "I'm glad you're here. I--I
feel pretty bad about you, Reginald--mighty bad, I can tell you!"

"For Heaven's sake, Jim, what's the trouble?" asked Rayton. "What have I
done--or what d'you think I've done?"

Harley flushed. "You know what the trouble is--what is worrying me," he
said. "You have not done anything. I am thinking of the marked card, as
you know very well."

Rayton laughed, and slapped the other on the back.

"Laugh, if you choose," returned Harley; "but I tell you it is no
laughing matter. Have you forgotten what I told you about those red
crosses? Have you forgotten the manner of my father's death? Great
heavens, man, it is nothing to laugh about! Those marks have brought two
men to their death. And there's Marsh! He came within an inch of being
drowned that day his pole broke. Of course, you think I am a fool. You
may call me one if you want to. But, for God's sake, get out of here
until the danger passes! That's all I ask, Rayton. Get out! Get away
from this settlement for a little while!"

The smile left the Englishman's face, and he gaped at his friend in
utter astonishment.

"Get out?" he repeated, in a dazed voice. "Get out? What for? What good
would that do to any one? What--in the name of all that's sensible--are
you driving at?"

"Get away from here--away from me--and save yourself," replied Harley.
"Don't you understand? This trouble is all _our_ fault--all due to my
sister. Don't you see that? Then get away from us! Drop us, and clear
out!"

"To save myself from the curse of the little red marks on the card, I
suppose?"

"Yes, yes. Go away and save yourself. That is what I ask you, Rayton."

"You really believe, then, in the power of those crosses? You really
believe that my life is in danger--that I have been marked by Fate?"

"I only know what those crosses have done in the past. The evil is not
in the marks, though. Don't think I'm quite a fool! But they are sent as
a warning--by some unknown enemy of ours. Can't you see that, Rayton? My
father was murdered after receiving a card marked with those crosses.
David Marsh's life was attempted! Don't you see? We have a bitter,
hidden enemy!"

"No, I don't!" retorted Rayton, with spirit. "I don't think Marsh's life
was attempted. Great heavens, Jim, didn't a canoe pole ever break in
this country before? And didn't a shack ever burn down before? Buck up
and look at the thing like a sensible man! What happened to that young
bounder Marsh was nothing but chance. You make me angry, 'pon my word
you do! But don't think for a minute that you can make me angry enough
to run away--or that you can scare me away. I stand pat; but if my house
catches fire, or anything of that kind happens, then I'll set to work
and dig up the fool who hands out those marked cards, and land him in
jail."

"I have asked you to go, for your own sake. I can't do anything more,"
returned Harley.

Rayton gazed at him earnestly, eye to eye; but Harley kept his eyes
steady.

"Jim, that sounds queer," he said. "It sounds like some rot that Nash
was talking, not long ago. Perhaps you know what I mean. Nash's idea was
that you dealt the marked card to Marsh, and then invented the story,
just to scare Marsh away from your sister. Now he will say that you are
trying to frighten me away."

"He is a liar!" cried Harley.

"I know your story is true," said the Englishman, "and I know you are
just as much in the dark about those cards as I am; but if you go on
like this, old chap, other people will think as Nash thinks. Nash is not
the only fool in these woods.

"And I want to tell you that even if you were trying to frighten me away
from here you couldn't do it! That's my position, Jim. I am here--and
here I stay! Whoever marks those cards is a harmless idiot. I love your
sister--though she doesn't know it, yet--and the only thing that can
chase me away from her is her own word. So save your anxiety for me, old
chap, and keep your wind to cool your porridge. Also, think the thing
over quietly; and, if it continues to worry you, go hunting for the man
who makes a fool of you by marking those cards. Good morning."

Reginald Rayton turned and strode away without waiting for an answer to
his last long speech. He was angry--hot and cold with it, from his head
to his feet. He had been excited into a premature disclosure of his
sentiments toward Nell Harley. He had been talked to like a fool--and
he had talked like a fool. He was furious. He felt the need of some one
to punch and kick. It was years since he had last been in such a wax.
And this was his mood when Doctor Nash appeared over the brow of a hill
in front, driving toward him in a mud-splashed buggy. Nash drew rein
within a yard of the Englishman. The Englishman halted. Nash leaned
forward, and grinned.

"That was a good one, last night," he remarked. "A good joke on old
Wigmore; but I don't quite see the point of it. Do you?"

"No. Is there supposed to be any point?" returned Rayton.

"Sure! What d'ye think it's all about if there isn't a point to it? You
fellows are lobsters, I must say, if you are still cloudy on that
business. Those marks are warnings--oh, yes! But they are not sent by
Fate. They are sort of 'keep off the grass' signs issued and posted by a
very dear friend of yours. Last night he felt my eye on him, and so
threw the bluff. It worked pretty well, too. It had me guessing for
about an hour; and then I thought it over after I went to bed, and got
it all straight and clear."

"I am glad that some one has it straight and clear," said Rayton. "I am
in the dark, myself; but I agree with you that the deal to Wigmore was
a bluff. I am positive about this because a marked card came to me twice
before supper."

Nash uttered a derisive whistle, then slapped his knee with an open
hand.

"I might have guessed it!" he cried. "So it's your turn, is it? Keep off
the grass, Reginald. Good old Jim! He knows what he's about."

"What are you driving at?" demanded the Englishman. "What has Jim to do
with it?"

He had heard the doctor's theory before, but wanted first-hand proof of
it--and he was looking for an excuse for letting loose.

"What has Jim to do with it?" repeated Nash sneeringly. "Why, you
lobster, he has everything to do with it. He's _it_! What's your head
made of, anyway? A block out of the oak walls of old England, I
suppose."

Rayton averted his face.

"Do you mean that Jim has anything to do with the marks on those cards?"
he asked, in a faint and unsteady voice.

"You lobster! He marks them, and he deals them!" cried Nash.

Rayton faced him.

"You are a liar," he said quietly. "Not only that, but you are a
bounder. Better whip up your nag and drive away, or I'll be tempted to
pull you out onto the road and give you what you need. You are a
disgrace to this settlement." He stepped back to the edge of the road.
"Drive along, fat head," he commanded.

But Nash did not drive along. He had a great opinion of himself--of his
physical as well as his mental powers. He hung the reins on the
dashboard.

"Do you mean that?" he asked. "Are you trying to insult me? Or are you
drunk?"

"I am not drunk. Yes, I am trying to insult you. It is rather a
difficult thing to do, I know."

"Steady, Champion!" cried Nash to his nodding horse. Then he jumped over
the wheel, threw aside his hat and overcoat, and plunged at Rayton, with
his fists flying. He smote the air. He flailed the sunlight. He punched
holes in the out of doors. At last he encountered something hard--not
with his fist, however, but with an angle of his face. With a futile
sprawl, he measured his considerable length in the mud and slush of the
highway. So he lay for a little while, one leg flapping, then scrambled
slowly to his feet. He gazed around in a dazed way, and at last rested
his glance upon Rayton.

[Illustration: "PLUNGED AT RAYTON, WITH HIS FISTS FLYING"]

"See here!" he exclaimed; "that--that's no way to do! Can't you fight
fair? What did you hit me with?"

The Englishman lifted his right fist, and pointed at it with the index
finger of his left hand.

"That is what I hit you with," he said in matter-of-fact tones. "But if
you don't think that fair, I'll land my left next time."

"Don't trouble," replied Nash. "I'm no match for a professional prize
fighter. That's not my line."

"Oh, cheer up! We've just begun."

"I've finished."

"In that case you can take back what you said about Jim Harley."

"What did I say?" asked the doctor, making a furtive step toward his
trap.

Rayton advanced. "Quick!" he cried. "Call yourself a liar, or I'll try
another prod at you!"

"Leave me alone. D--n you! I'll have the law on you for this. Keep off!
Mind what you're about. Keep your distance, I say. Yes, yes! You're
right. I'm a liar. _I'm a liar!_"

He jumped into his buggy, wakened Champion with a cut of the whip, and
drove away at a gallop, leaving his hat and overcoat on the side of the
road. For a minute Rayton stood and gazed after the bouncing vehicle.
Then he picked up the hat and coat, and placed them on the top rail of
the fence.

"That is the worst thing I ever saw in the way of a doctor," he said.
"Most of them are mighty good fellows--and I didn't know before that any
of them were quitters. But that chap? Why, he's a disgrace to a pill
box. Hope he'll come back for his duds, though."

Mr. Reginald Baynes Rayton turned, and continued on his homeward way,
swinging his feet well in front of him, and expanding his chest. But
presently he lost the air of the conquering hero. Misgivings assailed
him. He had picked a fight simply because he was in a bad temper. He had
called a more or less harmless individual names, and then punched him in
the jaw and forced him to call himself a liar.

"I'm ashamed of myself," he murmured. "What has become of my manners?"

He reached his house, and found Mr. Banks in the kitchen, still
reflectively consuming tobacco.

"What's the matter with you, Reginald?" inquired the New Yorker. "You
look excited."

"I am," replied Rayton, and told frankly but briefly of his talk with
Jim Harley and of his fight with Nash.

"I am glad you punched Nash, for I don't like the animal," said Banks.
"But why in thunder didn't you trim Harley first? He insulted you."

"He didn't mean to insult me. He believes in the potency of those red
crosses. It is a matter of family pride with him," answered Rayton.




CHAPTER XII

RAYTON IS REMINDED OF THE RED CROSSES


The snow vanished during the day, under the unseasonable glow of the
sun; but with evening came a biting frost and a choking, quiet wind out
of a clear sky. The next morning lifted bright and cold, with a glint of
ice over all the wilderness, but not so much as a patch or tatter of
snow anywhere.

Banks and Rayton breakfasted by lamplight, for they had planned a
morning after ruffled grouse. The sun was just over the eastern forests
when they stepped out from the warm kitchen to the frosted open,
buttoned their fur-lined gloves, and turned up the collars of their
blanket "jumpers." They separated at a spur of spruces and firs that
thrust itself, like a green buttress, into the yellow-brown of a back
pasture.

"You can have Turk. He may find you a belated woodcock or two," said
Rayton.

So Banks swung to the left, and entered the forest, with the obedient,
eager dog at his heels, and a trail of fragrant smoke drifting over his
shoulder, pure blue in the sunshine.

Rayton entered the woods to the right. He walked carelessly through the
underbrush, heedless of everything about him, and of the gun in the
hollow of his arm, grieving over his conversation the day before with
the brother of the woman he loved. Had Jim really expected him to behave
like a coward--to run away from the marked cards? Had Jim no better
opinion of him than that? He wondered if Nell knew that the cards had
been dealt to him? And if so, how she felt about it? Had Jim told her of
their heated argument, and of his--Rayton's--childish exhibition of
temper? That would not strengthen his chances with her. And what would
she think of him when she heard of his crude outbreak against Doctor
Nash? He trembled at the question.

"Those red crosses may be my undoing, after all, in a sneaking
roundabout way," he reflected.

A bird went whirring up from close in front of his trampling feet, and
got safely away. He halted, leaned his gun against a tree, and lit his
pipe.

"I must keep my wits about me," he said, "and stop worrying about those
silly cards, or everything will get away from me--birds and
everything."

He sat for about half an hour on a convenient stump in a patch of
sunshine, smoking, and working himself into his usual happy state of
mind. He dreamed of Nell Harley. He had visions of her--and he
discovered a golden trail of thought, and followed it into a golden
magical future. The cards, the argument with Jim, and the fight with
Nash were all forgotten. At the end of the half hour he continued on his
aimless way.

The lanes and little clearings of the forest were comfortably warm, for
the sunlight filled them, and the wind was walled away from them. The
peace of the frost-nipped, sun-steeped wilderness soothed and healed his
spirit. He moved slowly, and halted frequently to spy out some
twittering chickadee or flitting blue jay, to gaze up at the purple
spires of the spruces, or down at some flaming, grotesquely shaped
toadstool. He loved it all--every stump, shadow, sound, and soaring wall
of it, every flickering wing and furtive call, every scent, tone, and
silence.

He tramped onward, comforted, following his whim. At noon he halted
beside a brown brook, twisting among cedars here, alders there. He had
several thick slices of bread and butter in his pocket. He built a small
fire at the edge of the stream, skinned, in woodman's style, a plump
partridge that he had shot an hour before, broiled it to a turn, and
dined to a wish. After his meal, he spent a dozing hour between the red
fire and the brown stream, with the stem of his pipe between his teeth,
and great dreams behind his eyes.

"This suits me," he murmured. "I'll make a day of it."

He got to his feet at last, picked up his gun, and followed the course
of the stream downward, taking his time, and avoiding all tangles of
underbrush and difficult places. He waked up several grouse, and got one
clean shot. But he was not keen about making a bag. He was enjoying
himself in quite another way. Had there been paper and pencil in his
pocket, instead of feathers, crumbs of bread, and shreds of tobacco, it
is more than likely he would have tried to write a poem; for Mr.
Reginald Baynes Rayton was in love with a woman, and in love with nature
on one and the same golden day. Everything was forgotten but the quiet,
magical joy that steeped him to the soul.

It was about mid-afternoon when Rayton altered his course for home. He
studied the sky and his compass, and then turned his back to the brown
brook. He calculated that this line would take him out to Samson's Mill
Settlement shortly after sunset.

An hour later Rayton was still far from home, and among tall timber and
heavy underbrush. Red rays of sun flooded from the west, low and level,
and became tangled and lost among the black screens of the forest.
Rayton moved slowly, pushing his way through moosewood saplings. He
halted, drew his compass from an inner pocket, and reassured himself as
to his position.

And then, on the left, a rifle shot rang out, sharp and vicious. Rayton
jumped, spun round on his heels, then dashed forward, shouting strongly
and angrily. He heard the swishing and crackling of flight ahead of him.
He halted, raised his fowling piece, and let fly both barrels. He
bellowed murderous threats after the retreating, unseen sniper.

Then, quick as lightning, the strength went out of him. Voice and knees
failed together, and he sank silently to the forest loam. So he lay for
a minute, dizzy and faint, and stunned with wonder. In a dazed way he
set all his senses on a vague inquiry, searching for pain. But he felt
no pain--only a quick, strong pulsing in his left shoulder. He took
note of this cloudily. Then, of a sudden, his brain cleared, and anxiety
sprang alive in his heart.

He sat up, and put his right hand across his body. His shoulder--the
thick blanket stuff that covered it--was wet and hot. He held his hand
close to his eyes in the waning light, and saw that it was reeking red
from finger tips to wrist. A gasp of dismay escaped him. Again he felt
all about the wet place with his right hand. Now the blood was streaming
down his arm. He discovered the wound--a tender spot, high up.

"I must stop it," he muttered. "It's working like a pump. If I don't
plug it up, or tie it up, mighty quick, I'll be drained dry."

A vision of his bloodless corpse prone on the forest moss flashed across
his mind. Then he set swiftly and cleverly to work to check the flow of
blood. First, he made a thick pad of dry moss and a handkerchief, and
bound it tightly over the wound with a silk scarf from his neck. Then he
removed his elastic suspenders, and twisted them over his shoulder and
under his armpit four times. The pulsing became fainter and fainter, and
at last could not be felt at all.

"Thank God!" he exclaimed. "I do believe I've done the trick. Fine
thing, these patent Yankee suspenders."

He got to his feet, swayed, and sat down again.

"I must have lost a quart or two," he muttered. "No head--no knees--no
insides."

He sat very stiff for a little while in deep but meaningless thought.
His mind felt like a feather--a puff of smoke--drifting dust. An impish
wind was blowing it, and would not allow it to settle.

"This is queer," he said. "Is it loss of blood--or shock? Must do
something."

He scrambled to his feet again, picked up his gun, and pressed forward a
distance of about twenty yards. He felt a tickling in his shoulder
again. It strengthened to a faint throbbing. The horror of bleeding to
death returned to him with a grip on his heart. Pain he could struggle
against, and perhaps dominate; but this was not pain. This was tender
and warm--this flowing out of life.

He sat down again, and again the pulsing quieted and ceased. He saw that
he must make a night of it in the woods, unless help came to him. He
could not go forward in search of help. He must keep still--or bleed to
death. He saw this very clearly, as if written in great white letters
on a wall of blackness. And, more dimly, he saw the danger of freezing
during the long, cold night. Though warmly clothed, he had no blanket or
wrap of any kind.

Fire was the only thing at his command that could keep the frost away.
Reaching about with his right hand, he pulled up a great quantity of dry
moss. Then he shifted his position a little, and repeated the operation.
His arm was feeling numb now, and he could not detect any hint of the
pulsing sensation.

Twilight had deepened to night in the forest, and a still cold was
creeping in from the vast overhead and the wide, empty portals of the
north. Rayton felt about in the underbrush, and discovered plenty of dry
fuel, some of it even lying detached upon the ground. He piled his brush
and moss to one side of the irregular circle which he had cleared down
to the rock and soil, working with the least possible effort. With his
sheath knife he cut some living brush, some young spruces, and a few
small saplings.

By this time, his left arm and side were aching dully, but his head felt
steadier. He placed a bunch of moss, twigs, and larger sticks in the
cleared space, and struck a match. The flame curled up, grew, crowned
the dry heap, and painted the crowding walls of the forest with red,
dancing shadows. There was no wind--nothing astir in the air but the
drifting frost. The smoke of the fire went straight up toward the high,
aching stars, and the heat spread around in a narrow circle. Rayton
squatted close to the fire, and fed it with more dry sticks, and soon
with some of the green wood.

A sudden drowsiness came to him with the soothing glow of the fire. He
fought against it for a few minutes, and even nerved himself to crawl
away and drag in a large half-rotted stump. He placed this valuable
addition to his store of fuel fairly on the top of the fire, banked more
dry stuff beneath and around it, and then lay down on his couch of moss.
He felt comfortably warm, deliciously sleepy, and absolutely care free.
The pain in his arm was almost as numb as the arm itself. He scarcely
noticed it.

"This isn't so very bad, after all," he murmured. "So long as that
pumping doesn't begin again, I really don't care."

He lay on his right side, deep in the dry moss, and gazed into the fire.
He saw the red and yellow flames crawl up the flanks of the shattered
and hollow stump.

"It will catch," he murmured. "It will be all right. That's--a
good--fire. I'll just lie--here--and watch it--burn. Don't think
I'd--better--go to sleep. Not sleepy--any--way."

And then his lids slid down; and in his dreams he continued to watch the
red and yellow flames rise and fall, creep up, bring down, and mount
again. He dreamed that he did not sleep, but lay and watched the fire
crown the shattered stump and gnaw a dozen passages into its hollow
heart. That was all of his dream. It was no more than a picture, as far
as progress and action were concerned. It seemed to him that he lay deep
in the dry moss, on his right side, with his eyes wide open. So, for a
few minutes--and then the fire died down suddenly to blackness--so
suddenly that he sat bolt upright, and uttered a cry of dismay.

It had been a dream. Rayton had dreamed the long night away, thinking
himself awake; and now the cheerless gray of a November dawn was sifting
through the forest. The fire was a patch of dead ashes. The air was
bitterly cold. Rayton felt stiff and sore. His hands and feet were like
ice. As he sank back upon his right elbow, a sharp pain stabbed him in
the side. He groaned pitifully.

"This is worse than the bullet wound," he muttered. "And this is all my
own fault for going to sleep."

His shoulder, fortunately, neither bled nor pained him. The blood in the
pad of moss was dry. The arm was stiff, owing largely to the grip of the
elastic suspenders and the bandages; but that was only to be expected.
This hot pain in the side, however, leaping inward with every breath and
movement, told him of a serious danger.

"I'll just warm myself a bit, and then get out," he said. "I _must_ get
out, this time!"

He managed to heap up an armful of moss and twigs, and set it alight. He
crawled close to the quick flames, almost embracing the mound of smoke
and fire. Little sparks flew out, and fell upon his heavy, frosted
clothing, scorched for a little while, and then blinked to nothingness,
unheeded. He piled on more fuel, and fairly breathed the heat into his
lungs.

A shout rang strongly and hopefully through the silent forest. Rayton
sat up weakly, and gazed around him. The light was dim, and he saw
nothing but the soaring trees and crowding underbrush. He tried to
shout--but his voice was no more than a whisper. He tried again, with
desperate effort, and groaned with the hot agony that stabbed his lungs.
He put more dry fuel on the fire, for here was a signal more sure to
guide help to him than any outcry. Not content with this, however, he
crawled to his gun, inserted a loaded cartridge, and discharged it into
the ground; then crawled close to the fire again, lay prone, and made no
struggle against waves of flashing color and gigantic sound that flowed
over him, trampling him down, down fathoms deep.

When Rayton returned to the surface of that mighty tide, he discovered
his head to be supported by a human shoulder and arm. A flask, gripped
by a big, familiar hand, was against his lips. On the other side of the
fire stood Dick Goodine, gazing across at him with haggard eyes. Among
the trees, the daylight was stronger, and held a hint of sunshine. He
sighed, and parted his lips, and the potent liquor from the tilting
flask trickled down his throat and glowed within him.

"Thanks, you chaps," he muttered. "I'm mighty glad you found me."

"Drink some more," said Banks tenderly. "You feel like a block of ice.
Swig away, there's a good fellow. Better be drunk than dead!"

Rayton took another big swallow of the stinging brandy. Then, reviving
swiftly, he pushed the flask away.

"That's better," he said. "But I'm afraid I've caught a whacker of a
cold. Let my fire go out, you know. Got shot--and built a fire--and went
to sleep. Very foolish. How'd you happen to find me so soon? Good thing.
My side feels like the devil!"

"You just keep quiet for a while longer," said Banks. "We're going to
roll you up in this blanket, now, and feed you with hot beef tea."

Dick Goodine, who had not moved or spoken before, now passed around the
fire, stooped, and took the Englishman's right hand in both of his.

"I'm almighty glad you--you are awake, Reginald," he said huskily.

Then he straightened himself quickly, and turned away.

They rolled Rayton in two blankets, and placed him on a deep couch of
moss, close to the fire. They bared his feet, and rubbed them to a glow.
They filled him to the neck with scalding beef tea, strongly laced with
brandy. They built up the fire, until it roared like a burning hay
barn. Banks cut away the left sleeve of the blanket jumper, removed some
of the dry blood, and examined the wound.

"Clean as a whistle!" he exclaimed. "In here and out there. That is
nothing to worry about, I guess--now that it has stopped bleeding."

Goodine examined the shoulder in silence, and looked tremendously
relieved to see so clean a wound. Banks loosened the pinch of the
elastic suspenders over and under the shoulder. Then he put on fresh
bandages.

"How is the side feeling now?" he asked.

The Englishman smiled and nodded, mumbled some ghosts of words, and
then, under the spell of the beef tea and brandy inside him, and the
heat of the fire on his body, sank again to sleep. For a few minutes his
two friends sat and watched him in silence. Dick Goodine was the first
to speak.

"D'ye think he'll pull 'round all right?" he whispered.

"Of course he'll pull 'round," replied the New Yorker. "He is as strong
as a horse, and the bullet wound is not serious. His blood is clean,
thank Heaven!--as clean as his heart. He has got cold right into his
bones; but if the heat will drive out cold, I guess we'll thaw him,
Dick. Now is the time to try, anyway, before it gets set. We'll keep the
fire roaring. And in half an hour we'll wad more hot drinks into him.
We'll drive that pain out of his side, or bust!"

The trapper nodded, his dark eyes fixed upon Rayton's quiet face with a
haunted and mournful regard.

"We'll take him home before night," continued Mr. Banks; "and then we'll
go gunning for the skunk who tried to murder him!"

"You bet we will!" replied Goodine huskily.




CHAPTER XIII

CAPTAIN WIGMORE SUGGESTS AN AMAZING THING


Rayton's chest and side felt much better when he awoke from his second
deep sleep by the fire. It was noon; and though the air was frosty, the
sun was shining. Mr. Banks administered more beef tea to him, piping
hot.

"How did you happen to find me so soon?" asked the Englishman.

"Thank Dick for that," said Banks. "He dragged me out of bed before
dawn. He heard the shooting last night; but didn't think much about it
then. But when he learned that you had been out all day he began to
worry."

Dick Goodine nodded.

"That's right," he said. "The more I thought over them two shots, an'
the yellin' I heard, the queerer it all seemed to me."

"Did you see any one, Reginald?" asked Banks. "Do you know who plugged
you--or can you make a guess?"

Rayton shook his head. "I didn't see anything," he replied--"not even
the flash of the rifle. No, I can't guess. It was all so sudden!--and I
was so dashed angry and surprised, you know! I let fly with both
barrels--and then I fell down. Blood was just spurting, you know. I felt
very weak--and mad enough to chew somebody."

"So _you_ fired the second shot, did you?" queried Banks.

"Yes. I only hope I peppered the dirty cad. Of course, it may not have
been intentional. I haven't thought it out yet. Whoever fired the shot
may have mistaken me for a moose or deer. But it is pretty hard lines, I
think, if a chap can't walk through the woods without being sniped at by
some fool with a rifle."

"That's what set me wonderin'--that second shot," said the trapper. "I
was a durned idjit, though! I might er known there wasn't any strangers
shootin' 'round this country now--any of the kind that hollers like all
git-out every time they hit something--or think they do. But I was a
good ways off, an' late, so I just kept hikin' along for home."

"That's all right, old boy," said Rayton. "No harm done, I think. But
are you sure there are no strangers in the woods now? Who do you think
shot me, then?"

"Certainly not a stranger!" exclaimed the New Yorker. "You may bet on
that, Reginald. The murderous, sneaking, white-livered skunk who shot
you is the same animal who set fire to young Marsh's camp--the same
vicious fool who is at the bottom of all this marked-card business."

"Great heavens!" exclaimed the Englishman. "Do you really believe that?
Then the card trick is getting pretty serious. What do you think about
it, Dick?"

"It beats me!" said Dick, in a flat voice. "I don't know--an' I can't
guess. It's a mighty nasty-lookin' business, that's all I can say. Looks
to me like a job for the police."

"Not yet!" cried Rayton. "I can look after myself. Promise me to keep
quiet about it, will you? That will give us a chance to look 'round a
bit for ourselves. We don't want to start the whole country fussing
about."

"But what about Nash?" asked Mr. Banks. "He is bound to know. You'll
have to tell him how you came by the puncture in your shoulder."

"That is all right. It is only a flesh wound, and clean as a whistle. I
don't need Nash."

"We'll not argue about that, Reginald," returned Banks. "Here, drink
this brandy, and then we'll start for home with you. I am bossing this
show."

Two hours and twenty minutes later they had Rayton comfortably tucked
away between the warm sheets of his own bed. His two stalwart friends
had carried him every yard of the way, in a blanket, and he had not
suffered from the journey. Banks unbandaged his shoulder, and examined
the wound. He washed it in warm water, and moved the arm gently. The
blood began to flow freely. He bound the shoulder tightly, and nodded to
the trapper.

"Where are you going?" asked Rayton, as Dick opened the door.

"For Doctor Nash," answered Dick, and the door slammed behind him.

Dick saddled one of the horses, and rode off at a gallop. He was lucky
to find the doctor at home in the farmhouse where he boarded. He
delivered his message briefly, but clearly. Nash rubbed his hands
together, and informed the trapper that there was another doctor at Bird
Portage, twenty miles away. When asked to explain this remark, he
blustered and swore, and at last said frankly that Rayton could bleed
to death for all he cared.

"If you don't come peaceful an' quiet," said Goodine slowly, "then--by
hell!--you'll come the other way!"

Their eyes met, and flared for a second or two. Then Nash wavered.

"I'll come," he said.

"I'll wait for you," said the trapper. "Git a move on."

When they reached Rayton's house they found old Captain Wigmore in the
sitting room, smoking a cigar and smiling sardonically. Nash went
upstairs, but Wigmore beckoned the trapper to him.

"I've wormed it out of them," he said. "I know all about it; and that
means that I know a good deal more about it than you do."

"What? More about what?" asked Goodine anxiously.

"Just this, my good trapper of foolish beasts! Nash is the man who put
the hole through the Englishman's shoulder!"

Dick stared. At last he regained the use of his tongue.

"You're cracked!" he exclaimed. "Nash didn't do it!"

"What do you know about it?"

"Well, I guess I know that much, anyhow."

"Then who did it?"

"Don't know."

"But I do. You keep your eye on Nash when I tackle him. Then you'll
know."

Dick shook his head.

"I guess not," he murmured, and went upstairs, leaving the captain alone
with his thin smile and long cigar.

"I do believe that old crow has a slat loose," reflected the trapper.
"I'd give a good lot to know what he's truly thinking about, anyhow."

Doctor Nash, after brief greetings, set to work on Rayton's wounded
shoulder. He made a close examination, but asked no questions. He worked
swiftly for about half an hour.

"That's done," he said. "All you have to do now is to keep still for a
while." He paused and turned to Banks. "Has he been insulting and
assaulting somebody else lately?" he asked.

"Don't know," returned the New Yorker. "Why?"

"Just an idea of mine," replied Nash. "Some men are not as good-natured
as I am, you know. Somebody took a shot at him--and I was just
wondering why. It does not often happen 'round here."

"You are the only person I have behaved like that to," said Rayton,
"and--and--well, I am dashed sorry I lost my temper. I beg your pardon,
Nash. I am very sorry, honestly. I behaved like a cad."

"You should have thought of that before," sneered Nash.

At that moment old Captain Wigmore entered the room on the tips of his
neat little toes, smiling behind his whiskers.

"I see you've brought your company manners with you," said Nash. "I
thought you saved them up for the ladies." He had the old fellow on his
black list.

"Is that you, doctor?" returned the captain pleasantly. "So you have
been patching up this young man, I see. What do you think of your work?"

"Of my work? Oh, I guess my work is good enough. Have you anything to
say about it?"

"Why, yes, now that you ask me. Five or six inches to the side would
have done the job. Why didn't you do it when you were at it?"

Dick Goodine guessed what was coming; but the other three stared at the
old man in frank amazement. Nash looked bewildered.

"Six inches?" he queried. "Done the job? What the devil are you talking
about?"

"There are none so blind as those who won't see," replied Wigmore,
leering.

"What d'you mean? What are you grinning at?"

"Don't get excited, doctor. Bluster and bluff don't frighten me." He
stepped close to Rayton. "Who d'you think put that hole through your
shoulder, Reginald?" he asked.

"Haven't the least idea. Wish I had," replied the invalid.

"Dear me! What a dull young man you are," jeered Wigmore.

"Don't follow you," said the Englishman.

"Same here," said Banks.

Captain Wigmore chuckled. "I don't suppose you have an enemy anywhere
within five hundred miles of here?" he queried.

"Not to my knowledge," said Rayton.

"Then why did you and Nash fly at each other day before yesterday, in
the middle of the road? Why did you knock your dear friend flat in the
mud?"

"Oh, give us a rest!" exclaimed Nash, flushing darkly, and scowling at
the old man.

"That was nothing more than--than a sudden explosion of bad temper,"
said Rayton.

Wigmore nodded his head briskly, and turned to the doctor.

"And I noticed," he said, "that you did not wait to be knocked down a
second time. You hopped into your rig, and drove away at top speed. He
who fights and runs away--ah?"

"Really, captain, what is the necessity of all this?" protested Mr.
Banks.

Wigmore waved his hand toward the big New Yorker, as if at a fly that
had buzzed in his ear. His keen, glinting eyes were fixed with a
terrible, rejoicing intentness upon Doctor Nash.

"What were you doing in the woods yesterday afternoon?" he asked.

"Confound you!" cried Nash furiously. "What are you talking about? What
do you mean to imply? You skinny little runt, you must be mad!"

Wigmore laughed with a sound like the clattering together of dry bones.
Mr. Banks gripped him roughly by a thin, hard arm.

"Enough of this!" cried the big sportsman. "Either speak out like a man,
or shut up!"

"Very good," returned the captain, with another mirthless laugh. "All I
want to know is what Doctor Nash was doing in the woods to the west of
here yesterday afternoon, with a rifle. What game were you after,
doctor? I have always heard that you were not very keen on that kind of
sport."

"I wasn't in the woods!" cried Nash. "You are a liar!"

"Don't call _me_ a liar, _please_," protested the old man. "It is
Benjamin Samson who is the liar, in this case. He told me that you
borrowed his rifle yesterday, just before noon, and struck into the
woods."

Nash gasped, and his face faded to the sickly tint of a tallow candle.
He stared wildly at Wigmore, then wildly around at the others. He opened
and closed his mouth several times noiselessly, like a big fish newly
landed on the bank. But at last his voice returned to him suddenly and
shrilly.

"I forgot!" he cried. "I was out yesterday--with Samson's rifle--after
all. But what about it? Why shouldn't I go shooting if I want to? This
is a free country! But I know what you are--trying to make Rayton
think--you dirty little gray badger! You are hinting that I shot him!
I'll have the law on you for this, you--you----"

"I'll not wait to hear the rest of it, though it is sure to be apt and
picturesque," said the captain, flashing his dazzling "store" teeth.
"Good-by, Reginald, Good-by, all. See you to-morrow."

He bowed, skipped from the room, and hurried downstairs, and out of the
house. Doctor Nash sprang after him to the top of the stairs, trembling
and stuttering with rage; but he did not go any farther. He turned,
after a moment or two, and re-entered the room. He strode up to the bed.

"Do you believe that?" he cried. "Do you believe that I shot you,
Reginald Rayton?"

"Certainly not," replied Rayton promptly. "You wouldn't be such a fool
as to borrow a rifle to do it with, even if you wanted to kill me."

Nash turned upon Banks and Dick Goodine.

"And you two?" he cried. "Do you think that I tried to murder Rayton?
That I fired that shot?"

Dick Goodine, who stood by the window, with his face averted, answered
with a silent shake of the head. Mr. Banks did not let the question pass
so lightly, however. For several seconds he gazed steadily, keenly,
inquiringly into Nash's angry eyes. He was very cool and ponderous. The
scene suggested to Reginald Rayton the judgment of a mortal by a just
but inexorable god. Only his ever-ready sense of politeness kept him
from smiling broadly. Nash glared, and began to mutter uneasily. At last
the big New Yorker spoke.

"Circumstances are against you, Nash," he said slowly. "Nobody can deny
that. There is bad blood between you and Reginald. Reginald loses his
temper, and gives you a trimming. On the following day you borrow a
rifle, and go into the woods, and that evening the man who punched you
in the jaw is shot through the shoulder. It looks bad, Nash--mighty bad!
But--keep quiet!--but, in spite of appearances, I don't think you are
the guilty person."

"Then why the devil didn't you say so before?" cried the doctor,
trembling.

"Calm yourself," replied Mr. Banks, "and I'll try to explain to you my
reasons for naming you guiltless. In the first place, I believe you to
be a touch above shooting a man in the dark. Whatever you may be in
yourself, your profession would make you better than that. In the second
place, I don't think that you have any hand in the game of the marked
cards--and I am quite sure that the person who marks those cards knows
who put the hole through Reginald's shoulder."

Nash looked startled.

"I forgot about that!" he exclaimed. "Rayton told me that the card was
dealt to him--and then the--the subsequent argument we had kind of put
it out of my head."

Banks smiled. "Quite so. I don't wonder at it," he said. "But tell me,
do you still believe Jim Harley to be at the bottom of the card trick?"

Nash shot a glance at the bandaged man in the bed. "I do," he replied.
"I stick to that until some one proves it untrue, though every man in
this room gives me a punch in the jaw. It is a free country, and I have
a right to my opinion."

"Of course you have," agreed the New Yorker; "but I'll show you the real
trickster within two days from now. In the meantime, I shall keep my
suspicions and plans to myself."

Early that evening the snow began to fall, and by breakfast the next
morning it lay a foot deep over the frozen wilderness. Mr. Banks
prepared his own breakfast and Rayton's, and they ate together in
Rayton's room. Banks was washing the dishes in the kitchen when Dick
Goodine opened the door, and stepped inside.

"I'm off," said the trapper. "If I don't get busy pretty quick, I won't
have one fox skin to show, come spring."

He went upstairs, treading noiselessly as a bobcat, in his snowy
moccasins, shook hands with Rayton, asked considerately about the
shoulder, and then went out into the white world.

"I like that man," said Banks. "He's true blue."

"Right you are," replied the Englishman.

The last pan was cleaned and put away, when Banks was aroused from deep
thought by a faint knocking on the front door. He pulled down the
sleeves of his shirt, wriggled into his coat, made a hurried pass at the
thin hair on top of his head, with a crumb brush, then took his way
decorously along the hall, wondering who the formal caller might be. He
opened the door, and found Nell Harley in the little porch. Her clear
face was flushed vividly, and her clear eyes were wide with anxiety.

Mr. Banks mastered his astonishment before it reached his eyes.

"Come in! Come in!" he exclaimed. "This is delightful of you, Miss
Harley."

He seized one of her gloved hands, drew her into the narrow hall, and
closed the door.

"Jim started for one of his camps--early this morning--before we heard,"
she said. "So I have come to--to see Mr. Rayton. Is--he very--ill?"

"Ill!" repeated Mr. Banks cheerfully. "My dear young lady, he is fit as
a fiddle. We broke up his cold yesterday, you know, and the scratch on
his shoulder is nothing. Please come in here. I'll just touch a match to
the fire."

"Where is Mr. Rayton?" she asked, as he stooped to light the fire in the
sitting-room stove.

"Oh, he's at home. I'll tell him you are here."

"I'm sure he is in bed."

"Well, so he is. It is the safest place to keep him, you know, for he is
always getting into trouble."

"I--I want to see him--to speak to him," she whispered.

"Then wait a minute, please. I'll run upstairs and try to make him look
pretty," said Mr. Banks.

When Miss Harley entered Rayton's bedroom, she found the invalid sitting
up against a stack of pillows, smiling cheerfully, slightly flushed,
his shoulders draped with a scarlet blanket. He extended his hand. She
drew off her gloves, and took it firmly. Neither spoke for fully half a
minute. Mr. Banks left the room, light on his feet as a prowling cat.

"It is the curse," she said, at last, unsteadily. "When you are strong
again you--you must go away."

"Am I really in danger?" he asked very softly. "Under the old conditions
of the curse, you know?"

Her eyes wavered.

"Your life has been attempted," she whispered.

"I mean to stay," he replied, somewhat breathlessly, "until that curse
has done its worst on me--or until you love me!"




CHAPTER XIV

FEAR FORGOTTEN--AND RECALLED


The color slipped away, then flooded back to Nell Harley's cheeks and
brow. Her fine eyes brightened, then dimmed sweetly. She withdrew her
hand from his, and turned away.

"Until you love me," repeated Rayton, in a dry voice that strove to be
both commonplace and courageous. "If--if that is not to be," he
continued, "then I will go away."

She whispered something; but because of her averted face he did not
catch the words.

"I beg your pardon?" he queried fearfully. "I did not hear."

Now she stood with her back to him; but not far from his one capable
hand hanging empty and hungry over the edge of the bed.

"Can't you--pretend?" she asked very faintly.

"Pretend?" he repeated, in wonder; for, after all, he was rather a
simple soul in some things. "Pretend? I am not pretending. I don't
think I am much of a hand at pretending. What--do you mean?"

"If--you--care for me--please pretend that you do not like me at all.
Keep away from our place--you know, and--and when we meet by
accident--don't--don't look at me as--you do."

Rayton did not answer immediately.

"I couldn't do that," he said, after a brief but electrical silence. "Of
course I _could_--but it would be harder for me than--than being shot
every day of my life. I am rather a fool at pretending, I'm afraid. But
if you say so, if you say I--I have no chance, then I'll clear out--at
the double--without a kick!"

"It is because--because I care so for you--that I ask you to do these
things," she whispered.

[Illustration: "'IT IS BECAUSE--BECAUSE I CARE SO FOR YOU--'"]

The Englishman gasped, then trembled. He gazed at the young woman's
straight, fur-clad back with an untranslatable illumination in his wide
eyes. His lips moved, but uttered no sound. Then a brief, wondering
smile beautified his thin face. He moved his shoulders on the pillow
furtively. He leaned sideways, and stretched forth his hand. The strong,
brown fingers touched a fold of the long fur coat, and closed upon it
tenderly, but firmly. She neither turned nor moved.

"That curse is only a bad dream," he said, his voice gruff with the
effort of speaking in a tone below a joyous shout. "There is no curse!
Some misguided person is trying to make fools of us all. His game will
be spoiled in a day or two. Why should we fear him?--whoever he is! I do
not want to go away from you--even for a minute! I cannot hide my love
for you. You would think me a poor sort of man if I could. I love you! I
love you! I love you! Dearest--say that again!"

He pulled gently, half fearfully, on the fur coat. Nell turned slowly,
and faced him. Her lips trembled, and her white throat fluttered. Two
bright tears glinted on her cheeks, all unheeded--by her. He took note
of them, however, and was enraptured with their beauty, as no fire and
gleam of diamonds could have enraptured him. She smiled slowly, with
parted, tremulous lips and shining eyes. She smiled at his illuminated,
awe-stricken, yearning face. She looked down at the hand clasping the
skirt of her coat so desperately.

"Do you care--so much?" she asked.

"I love you," he said gravely.

"I wonder why you love me! I am not--beautiful."

He pulled again, with a spasmodic jerk, on the fur coat.

"Beautiful!" he cried. "You? You are the most beautiful thing God ever
made!"

"Reginald!" she protested, in a whisper, gazing down at his hand so as
to hide her face from him.

He was full of courage now. Even love could not frighten him. Daring
blazed in him.

"Kiss me--quick!" he whispered. "I hear Banks on the stairs! Quick!" He
pulled at the coat, with fearless determination. For a fraction of a
second she resisted; and then, sudden, impetuous, whole-hearted, she
stepped forward, sank to her knees beside the bed, pressed her young
breast to his unwounded shoulder, and her lips to his. He felt the
moisture of her tears. The ascending Banks was forgotten.

"Hem! Ah--I _beg_ your pardon!" exclaimed the New Yorker.

The girl was on her feet, and two yards away from the bed in a flash.
Her cheeks and brow were crimson; but she faced the big sportsman with
something of defiance in her attitude. Reginald Rayton neither moved nor
spoke. He lay with his eyes closed, breathing quickly. Mr. Banks looked
the most guilty of the three. He shuffled his feet. His glance fell
before the glory and daring of the girl's face. He saw that it was
beautiful, now absolutely beautiful, and he knew love to be the
beautifier. He was abashed. For a few seconds he was utterly bereft of
his usual aplomb. Had he been the inspiration of that light on her face
and in her eyes, it is probable that he would have known exactly what to
do. At last he advanced, bowed ponderously, and lifted one of her hands
to his lips. Then he stepped over to the bed.

"Reginald, you have all the luck," he said. "I congratulate you from the
bottom of my heart. I'd take on the risks myself for--well, for
one-tenth part of the reward."

Nell came back to earth--to the lower levels where lives are lived out,
and fear stalks through sun and shadow.

"The risks! I had forgotten them," she whispered.

Mr. Banks completed his recovery at that. He turned to her, smiling, his
capable, bland self again.

"If you are thinking of the card trick," he said, "I beg you to put it
out of your mind forever. There is a fool working that card trick--and
that is all it has to do with a curse. A fool is always a curse. So
don't worry! Reginald is as safe as I am, for I'll have the mask off
that fool, and the claws out of him before he can try any more of his
mad games. All you have to do, my dear, is trust Harvey P. Banks--and
love this calf, Reginald, I suppose."

"You are very, very kind," she answered gently, "and I hope and pray
that you are right. I must go home now, or Kate will be anxious.
Good-by, Mr. Banks. Good-by, Reginald."

When the New Yorker returned from letting Miss Harley out of the house,
he sat down in a chair beside his friend's bed, lit a cigar, tilted his
head far back, and smiled at the ceiling. For several minutes neither of
the men spoke. Then Rayton said, in a nervous voice: "You don't think
she'll catch cold going home, do you?"

"No, my soft and addled lover," replied Mr. Banks. "She is not at all
likely to catch cold. She is wearing a long coat of mink skins, with
other things inside it, no doubt. Her boots are thick; her gloves are
lined with fur; her hat--ah, I am not sure of her hat. There is danger,
of course, that the sky may fall down on her, or that a rail may fly off
a fence and hit her on the head. But the chances are that she'll win
home safely, and live until to-morrow."

"Those are not things to joke about," said Rayton reprovingly.

The other laughed long and hard. Then: "Right you are," he said.
"Seriously, Reginald, I am sore with envy of you. I have lived a long
time, in many cities of the world, and have known many women--but I give
first prize to this girl of yours. I have loved many; but here, again,
Nell Harley takes first honors."

"What? D'ye mean that _you_ love her, too, H. P.?" asked the Englishman
anxiously.

"Sure thing," replied the New Yorker. "What d'you think I am made of,
anyway? D'you think I am blind, deaf, and heartless? Of course, I love
her!--but you needn't glare at me, Reginald. I'm not running. I know
when to sit down and do the delighted uncle act. That girl loves you;
and, if I have learned anything in my varied career, she'll keep on
loving you till the end of the game. You are a lucky dog, Reginald, and
I give you my blessing."

"Thanks very much, H. P.," returned Rayton, with emotion. "I am a lucky
chap, and no mistake!"

In the meantime, Nell Harley made a swift and glowing passage across the
field. She found Kate in the sitting room.

"Is Mr. Rayton in a serious condition?" asked Kate. "Dear me, what a
splendid color you have! You look really beautiful. What has happened?"

Nell began to laugh excitedly. She threw aside her gloves and mink-skin
coat. She cut several unclassified dancing steps on the rug in front of
the fire.

"What on earth is the matter with you?" demanded the young matron
anxiously.

"Nothing," said Nell. "I kissed him--that is all."

"You kissed him? Good gracious! What for?"

"He told me to."

"_Told_ you to?"

"Yes. Well, he asked me to. He--he said he would rather be shot through
the shoulder every day of his life than go away from--me. He said he
loved me--he said it over and over and over again. He says it is
nonsense--all about that curse. So it is. Then, all of a sudden, I
just----"

"Fell into his arms," interrupted the young matron.

"No, indeed! That would have hurt his shoulder. Anyway, he was in bed,
and bandaged. I just didn't care about anything or anybody in the world
except him--and then I kissed him. Then Mr. Banks came in--and caught
us!"

"Nell!"

"And as soon as he recovered himself he kissed my hand, and
congratulated Reginald, and promised to catch the man who shot him
before he has a chance to shoot him again."

"Nell, you talk like--like a--I don't know what! You went away almost
frightened to death about that marked card and the old family curse--and
now you--you are absolutely brazen. I never heard you talk like this
before. I never saw you act or look like this before. What will Jim say
when he hears of it?"

"I don't care what Jim says," replied Nell. "He can keep on believing in
that old curse if he chooses. Reginald is not afraid of it--so neither
am I--now. It is wonderful to be loved like that, Kate!"

"Pooh! Teach your grandmother!" retorted Kate.

Nell's excitement soon passed, and fear stole back into her heart--fear
that some new danger threatened the man she loved. And just as her love
was greater now than it had been before that first kiss, so was the fear
greater now. And her belief in the curse--the supernatural curse--of the
marked card, returned to her. She remembered her father's adventure and
tragic death. She went up to her own room, and knelt by the head of her
own bed, as she had knelt at the head of Reginald Rayton's. But now she
knelt to pray.

Things continued to happen at Rayton's house during the remainder of the
day. Doctor Nash called just about noon, examined the wound, detected
and treated a slight cold in the chest, and stayed to dinner. He helped
Banks get dinner, and even made a show of drying the dishes afterward.
He was evidently doing his best to forget his quarrel with the
Englishman. Old Wigmore's accusation seemed to be worrying him
considerably. He referred to it frequently, and even accounted for
himself minutely during the season of his possession of the borrowed
rifle. Rayton laughed at him.

"I know you didn't shoot me, so why explain?" said the Englishman.

"It is just as well to explain the thing. Old Wigmore has a poisonous
tongue and a poisonous mind," returned the doctor. "I believe he is
cracked."

Nash had not been gone more than an hour when Captain Wigmore himself
appeared.

"I am lonely," said the old man, "and I am getting rather sick of doing
my own cooking."

"Thought Fletcher did the cooking," said Mr. Banks.

"So he did; but he has gone away," replied Wigmore. "He cleared out some
time or other night before last--the night you were shot, Reginald."

"Where for--and what for?" asked Banks, getting interested.

"He said, in a letter that he was good enough to leave behind him, that
he is tired of me and of the backwoods, and can do better for himself in
New York. I suppose he has set out for New York. He is a queer fish, you
know, is old Timothy Fletcher. He has been with me for years, and has
always been more trouble to me than comfort. But he was a handy man and
a good cook. I am sorry he took it into his head to go just now. It
makes it very awkward for me."

"Did he take anything with him?" asked the would-be detective.

"Only his own duds--and a little rye whisky."

"Where was he the afternoon and evening before his departure?"

"Where was he? Let me think. I am sure I can't say, Banks. Why?"

"Oh, I don't know. He seemed to me rather an interesting old codger. His
manners were the worst I ever saw. I wonder what struck him to leave you
so suddenly."

Captain Wigmore shrugged his neat shoulders and laughed harshly.

"Perhaps the poor old chap thought he would be suspected and accused of
potting our young friend here," he suggested. "He is a prowler, you
know. He frequently wanders 'round in the woods for hours at a time, and
he usually carries firearms of some kind or other."

Mr. Banks leaned forward in his chair. "I never heard of Fletcher as a
sportsman," he said. "But even so, how could he have heard of Reginald's
accident? You say he was gone by morning--and it was not until morning
that Goodine and I found Reginald. So there can't be anything in that
suggestion of yours, captain."

"Very likely not," replied Wigmore. "I am not a detective and have no
ambitions that way. All I know is that Timothy went away in a hurry,
leaving a letter behind him in which he addressed me in very
disrespectful terms."

"Is that all you know, captain?"

"Not quite, after all. I had a rifle--and it has vanished."

"Great heavens! You knew all this, and yet you accused Nash of having
wounded Reginald!"

"Well, why not? Some one must have done it--and the circumstances are
more against Nash than Fletcher. Nash had a score to settle with
Reginald; but I do not think there was any bad blood between our friend
and Timothy."

"But you say Timothy is queer?"

"Oh, yes, he is queer. Always has been. He is mad as a hatter--if you
know how mad that is. I don't."

"What about the marked card?" asked Rayton. "Don't you think it is
potent enough to pull a trigger without the help of either Nash or
Fletcher?"

The old man laughed. "I am getting a bit weary of that card," he said.
"Whoever is playing that trick is working it to death. And now that I
come to think of it, it strikes me that I was the last person to receive
those red marks. So why hasn't the curse, or whatever it is, struck me?"

"You were the last," replied Rayton, "but it was dealt to me that same
evening."

"Bless my soul! D'you mean to say so?" exclaimed Wigmore. "That is
interesting. It looks as if there is something in Jim's story, after
all. Let me see! The marks were handed to Jim's father several times,
weren't they? And he came to a sudden and violent death, didn't he? Of
course it must be all chance, combined by somebody's idea of a joke--but
it looks very strange to me. I don't like it. But why do you get the
marks, Reginald? Are you sweet on Miss Harley?"

Rayton laughed--and his laughter was his only answer.

Banks and the captain played chess, and said nothing more about the
marked cards or Timothy Fletcher. Captain Wigmore won all the games
easily. Then he went home. Banks put the chessmen away, fixed the fires
downstairs, and then returned to his seat by Rayton's bed. He sat for a
long time in silence, with puckered brows.

"Queer thing about old Fletcher," said the Englishman.

"I believe you, my son," answered Mr. Banks. "It is so darned queer I
guess it calls for investigation. Fletcher is an exceedingly rude old
man--and his master is an exceedingly _uneven_ old man."

"Yes. I don't understand either of them," admitted Rayton.

Banks raised his heels to the edge of the bed, leaned well back in his
chair, and lit a cigar.

"Who tied old Fletcher to the poplar tree, d'you suppose?" he queried.

"Haven't the faintest idea."

"But I have," said the would-be detective. "I'm on a double track now.
I'll have something to show you coming and going."




CHAPTER XV

MR. BANKS IS STUNG


Mr. Banks went over to the Harley place early on the morning after
Nell's visit, with a note from Reginald Rayton. The contents of the note
seemed to delight and comfort the girl. Banks saw violets on the
sitting-room table. He stared at them in astonishment. Mrs. Jim Harley
caught the look and laughed.

"They belong to Nell," she said. "Captain Wigmore brought them last
night. I am sure he sent all the way to Boston for them."

"Wigmore, too," remarked Banks reflectively. "Well, we are all in the
same boat."

He remained for half an hour, and then went home with a fat missive for
Reginald, from Nell, in his pocket. The letter threw the Englishman into
a foolish glow. For a whole hour after reading it he lay without a word
and grinned.

Banks went for a walk in the afternoon, and met Captain Wigmore. The
captain wore a new, fur-lined overcoat. His whiskers were brushed to the
last hair, and his manner was as dazzlingly polished as his false teeth.
He walked jauntily. The two exchanged a few commonplaces very agreeably.
Then Banks, prompted by a sudden inspiration, went to the house of one
Silas Long and engaged the eldest son of the family, Billy Long, aged
sixteen, to live at Rayton's for a month and attend to the wood and the
stock. He made the arrangements in Rayton's name. He told the lad to put
in an appearance before sunset, and then went home. He explained this
move to Reginald by saying frankly that he wanted to be absolutely free
to solve the mysteries upon which he was engaged. The Englishman had no
objections.

Mr. Banks left the house again right after the evening meal. It was a
clear, starlit night. He walked slowly toward Captain Wigmore's
dwelling, and within a few yards of the gate came face to face with the
captain.

"Hello!" exclaimed Wigmore. "Is that you, Banks? Are you coming to see
me?"

"No, I was just strolling 'round for a bit of fresh air," replied
Banks.

"Well, I am glad of that. I have an engagement for the evening."

"An engagement--in Samson's Mill Settlement! You seem to lead a gay
life, captain."

Wigmore chuckled. The New Yorker turned, and the two walked side by side
along the snowy road for a short distance. Then Banks said: "I'll leave
you now, captain, and cut home through the woods. Hope you'll have a
pleasant evening."

"I look forward to a very entertaining one," replied the old man,
chuckling.

Banks left the road, climbed a fence, and strode along through dry snow
that reached halfway to his knees. He was in a pasture dotted with
clumps of young spruce.

"The conceited old idiot!" he muttered. "I see his game. I'll fix him!"

He halted, behind a thicket, and stood motionless for a few minutes,
listening intently. Then he made a wide half circle to the right, and
soon came out again upon the beaten road but now about a quarter of a
mile beyond the captain's house. His feet were cold and he stamped
vigorously on the road to warm them. The night was windless, but bitter.

Mr. Banks advanced stealthily toward the dark house. Not a glimmer of
light showed in any window. He opened the front gate cautiously, closed
it cautiously behind him, and went furtively up the narrow path between
the snow-banked lawns. On the step of the little front porch he paused
and listened. Then he grasped the knob of the outer door and turned it.
The door opened noiselessly.

He entered the narrow porch and stood with his ear against the inner
door. He could not hear anything. He fumbled for the knob, found it, and
learned that the inner door was locked. He hunted under the mat and in
every corner of the porch for the key, having heard somewhere that keys
were sometimes hidden away in just such foolish places. He did not find
it. Again he listened at the door, this time with his ear against the
keyhole. The house was silent as a tomb.

He left the porch, closed the outer door, and made his way to the left
along the front of the house and around the corner to the woodshed.
Knowing that he could not possibly avoid leaving a trail in the snow, he
shuffled his feet so as to make it an unreadable one. He did this so
artfully that not one clear impression of his big New York hunting boots
was left in his path. He opened the door of the shed without a check and
felt his way between piles of stove wood to the door of the kitchen.

"I don't feel respectable," he murmured. "But I'll feel a darned sight
worse if any one finds me sneaking 'round like this. I must get in,
though, and have a look 'round."

The kitchen door was fastened tight. Banks twisted the knob this way and
that, all in vain. In spite of his coonskin coat and fur cap he was
beginning to feel extremely chilly. He promised himself a husky pull at
a bottle of some kind or other should he ever manage to break into the
house. He left the shed and tried a back window. He could not get a hold
on the sash, however. He drew a heavy clasp knife from his pocket and
forced the strong blade between the sill and the bottom of the sash. In
this way he pried the sash up almost half an inch. The window had not
been fastened. He returned to the shed, and after a few minutes of
fumbling about in the darkness he found an axe. By using the thick blade
of the axe in place of the knife he soon had the window on the move. He
propped up the sash, put the axe back in its place, and returned to the
window. With a shove of his right hand he forced it up to the top. This
done, he paused for a moment and stood with every sense and nerve on
the alert. He heard nothing, saw nothing, felt nothing.

"I wonder if my little idea is the right one," he murmured. "I wonder
what I shall find."

He put his gloved hands on the sill, hoisted himself, tipped forward,
and wriggled through the window into the dark and silent room. His hands
touched the floor first. He pulled his legs across the ledge and was
about to stand straight when his knife slipped from the pocket of his
coat and clattered on the floor. Still crouched low, he groped forward,
found the knife--and then!

It seemed to Harvey P. Banks that he had been asleep a long, long time
on a very uncomfortable bed in a very stuffy room. The greatest trouble
with the bed must be in the arrangement of the pillows, he reflected,
for his neck was terribly stiff and sore. He did not open his eyes right
away. There was a feeling in his head and eyes--yes, and in his
mouth--suggestive of other awakenings, in the years of his gay youth. So
he lay with his eyes closed, remembering that a too sudden opening of
the lids under certain once familiar conditions was decidedly
unpleasant. He tried to get his wits into line. Where was he? Where had
he been last night? What had he been drinking? His poor head only
throbbed in answer. So, at last, very cautiously, he raised his heavy
lids. He gazed upon darkness--against utter darkness on every side. No.
Directly above his head was a faint sheen of gray. That was a window, no
doubt; but what was a window doing above his head? That beat him, and he
closed his eyes again and tried hard to remember things. The far-away
past came clearly to him; but that did not help him. He knew that the
things he remembered were of months--even of years--ago.

He was surprised to find that he wore heavy, fur-lined gloves, a fur cap
pulled low over his ears and forehead, and a coonskin coat. He put out
his right hand and touched a wall of ice-cold dusty floor. He judged
that the floor was not more than six inches below the level of his body.
He put out his left hand and touched a wall of ice-cold plaster. With a
grunt of dawning dismay he sat up, and though his neck ached, and his
head spun and throbbed with the effort, he leaned forward and touched
his feet with his gloved hands. He felt his heavy shooting boots and a
flake or two of pressed snow on their soles--and at that his brain awoke
and the memory of his informal entrance into Captain Wigmore's house
flashed clear. He uttered a low cry of wonder and consternation.

"What happened?" he whispered. "Did I fall and stun myself as I climbed
over the window sill?"

His head behaved so badly at this point that he lay prone again on his
hard couch. But now his brain was working clearly, though painfully.
Every incident of his attempt to enter the house, with a view to reading
the mystery which he was sure it contained, was now as plain as a
picture before his inner vision. He reviewed the whole adventure
minutely, from the meeting with Wigmore to the opening of the window and
the dropping of the knife upon the floor of the pitch-black room. But
what had happened after that? Something sudden--and hard! Yes, there
could be no doubt of the suddenness and hardness of the next occurrence.
But what was it? Had he toppled forward and struck his head against a
piece of furniture? Or had something possessed of individual initiative
hit him over the head? He sat up again, removed his gloves and cap, and
felt all over his head with chilly, inquiring fingers. He could not find
any lump or cut; but the back and top of the head were agonizingly
tender to the touch.

"A sandbag--whatever that is," he muttered. "I have heard that they
effect one somewhat in this way, if properly applied."

He laughed shortly and painfully. His head seemed to have recovered
something of its normal position and balance. It felt more solid and
steady, and the ache in it was duller. He fumbled through the pockets of
his fur coat and found a pipe, tobacco pouch, and box of matches. His
clasp knife was not there. Evidently he had not succeeded in picking it
up, that time.

"Sorry for that," he muttered. "I could carve my way out of any place
with that knife."

He opened the fur coat, and found the contents of his inner pockets
intact--his watch, cigar case, three rifle cartridges, the stub of a
pencil, a few pocket-worn letters, and a railway timetable. He knew each
article by the feel of it. He opened the match box, and was glad to
discover that it was full. Then he took out his watch and lit a match.
The hands of the watch marked the time as half-past two--and the fact
that the watch had not run down proved to him that the hour was of the
early morning. He had lain unconscious more than five hours. He wound
the watch and returned it to his pocket. Then he struck another match,
held it high, and gazed inquiringly around him. The match was of wax,
and held its flame for nearly half a minute. He saw a small room, white
and bare of walls, bare of floor, with a sloping ceiling, broken by the
square of a little skylight. The only article of furniture in the place
was a narrow couch upon which he sat. A door of unpainted spruce divided
the wall at that end of the room where the ceiling reached its greatest
height.

Harvey P. Banks dropped the butt of the match to the floor and rubbed
the spark out of it with his foot. He knew that he was in some one's
attic; and he felt almost equally sure that it was the attic of Captain
Wigmore's house. But who had hit him over the head and then carried him
up and deposited him in this place? He had his suspicions, of course.
Perhaps the captain had sandbagged him. The old man might easily have
returned to the house immediately after parting with him on the road. Or
Timothy Fletcher? Why not Timothy Fletcher? Wigmore had been lying when
he said that Fletcher had run away to New York. Banks had felt sure of
that at the time the statement was made--and now he felt doubly sure of
it. Very likely they had both taken a hand in the game. Neither one of
them by himself could have carried Harvey P. Banks up to the garret.

Mr. Banks felt cold and sleepy and sore. The soreness was of spirit as
well as of body and head. He had certainly made a mess of things. And he
felt anxious--decidedly anxious. Who was to make the next move? And what
was the next move to be? He would have paid high to find himself snug
and safe in his own bed in Reginald Rayton's house. What was Reginald
thinking? But he had proved one thing! He had proved, beyond a doubt,
that the inmates of Captain Wigmore's house were mysterious and
undesirable persons.

He lit a cigar, lay back on his hard couch, and smoked reflectively. His
head was not yet steady enough to allow of action. After an inch or two
of the cigar had turned to ash, he sat up and got noiselessly to his
feet. He had not heard a sound since recovering consciousness. Perhaps
the house was empty? He lit a match and tiptoed to the door. He turned
the knob cautiously. The door was locked.

"I guess it's not my turn yet," he murmured, and went back to the couch.
He drew his cap down about his ears, fastened his fur coat up to the
chin, and lay flat on his broad back. But before the cigar was finished
he was on his feet again. He lifted the couch and placed it with his
head against the door. Then he extinguished the butt of the cigar, lay
down, and went to sleep.

Mr. Banks awoke suddenly. He was stiff and cold, but every sense was on
the alert. His head felt much better than it had before his sleep. The
room was full of gray light that filtered down from the snow-veiled
window in the roof. He looked at his watch. It was seven o'clock. He
listened intently, but could not hear a sound.

"I can see well enough now to take a hand in the game," he said. "So I
guess it is my turn to play."

He lifted the cot away from the door and set it down at one side without
a sound. Then he raised his right leg, drew his knee well back,
presented the heel of his big boot at the lock of the door, and drove it
forward with all the strength of his great hip and thigh. The lock
burst, and fell in fragments; and the door, having been constructed so
as to open inward, split, and tore itself from its hinges and flapped
wide. Thick muscles had bested thin iron in a single effort.

"There! Confound you!" exclaimed Mr. Banks, staggering a little to
recover the balance of his big body. He saw, beyond the gaping and
twisted door, by the feeble light from his own room, a dark, bare hall
and the unpainted rails around the top of a narrow staircase. He
advanced one foot across the threshold, stooped forward, and listened
intently. His big body, in its big coat of coonskins, filled the width
of the doorway and shut out much of the feeble illumination that
descended from the skylight behind and above him. So he stood for a
minute or two before he heard a sound save that of his own breathing.
And then! What is that? A single, furtive tap, as of something hard on a
thin edge of wood, close in front of him. He turned sideways on the
threshold so as to let the light from behind him reach the floor in
front.

What was that, thin and black, slanting up at him between the rounds of
the railing? It had a sinister look. It did not move. Behind it was the
black gulf of the stairway. Mr. Banks hesitated for a moment, then began
to edge forward.

"Stop where you are!" commanded a voice--the voice of old Captain
Wigmore. "This thing is the barrel of a rifle. I am behind the rifle. If
I press on the trigger, my dear Banks, I am sure to hit you somewhere,
you are so unnecessarily large. In the belly, most likely. That's right!
Stand still."

"You, Wigmore!" exclaimed the New Yorker. "What is the meaning of this?
What are you talking about? You must be stark mad!"

The other laughed. It was a most discomforting sound. The laugh of a
land crab--if the beast _could_ laugh--would doubtless resemble Captain
Wigmore's expression of mirth.

"You seem to be indignant, my dear fellow," he said, with exasperating
calm. "But what do you expect? I caught you breaking into my house when
you were under the impression that I was not at home. Do you think I
should have put you in my own bed, with a hot-water bottle at your feet,
and carried your breakfast up to you this morning? No, no, my dear
Banks! It is my duty to this country, and to society in general, to keep
a firm hand on you until the officers of the law relieve me of the
charge."

"You old hypocrite!" cried Banks. "You scheming, lying, old devil! Bring
the officers of the law! The sooner they get here the better I'll be
pleased. I have something to say to them."

Wigmore chuckled. "I haven't sent for them yet," he said. "I rather
enjoy the prospect of looking after you myself for a little while. I can
stand it--if you can."

Mr. Banks watched the barrel of the rifle out of the corner of his eye;
but the menacing thing did not waver.

"Where is Timothy Fletcher?" he asked.

"So that is your bright suspicion, is it?" returned Wigmore cheerfully.
"He went to New York, I told you. Where do you think he is?"

"In this house, you old ape!" cried Banks.

Wigmore hooted.




CHAPTER XVI

THE LITTLE CAT AND THE BIG MOUSE


The light was stronger, though still gray and thin. It was the light of
an unsunlit November day filtered through a small square of snow-drifted
glass into a chilly garret. The light alone was enough to drop a man's
heart to the depths; but it was not the only thing that depressed Harvey
P. Banks. He was anxious, cold, and hungry. He was sickened with disgust
of himself and hate of Captain Wigmore. His head ached, his neck and
shoulders were sore. To add to all this he could now see the face and
eyes of his jailer by the cheerless light. The sight was not one
calculated to dispel his anxiety or warm his blood. The eyes gleamed
balefully up from the gloom of the stairway, with a green gleam in them
like the eyes of a cat watching its helpless prey. In front of the eyes
showed the black barrel of the rifle.

"How long do you intend to keep up this farce?" inquired Banks.

"I can stand it as long as you can," was the crisp reply.

"Very likely; but I don't see that I have any say in the matter just
now."

"You are wrong, my big friend. You can have your liberty--qualified
liberty--this minute if you wish. All you have to do is swear to me, on
your honor as a Christian and a gentleman, that you will never mention
this little adventure to a living person. You must invent some story for
Rayton and set out for New York to-night. You must drop this feeble idea
of yours of playing the detective. In short, you must swear to mind your
own business in the future and leave me and mine alone."

"I'll see you in hell first!" cried the sportsman. "I am on your trail,
and I'll stick to it. You'll pay heavily for this."

Wigmore chuckled. "Pay?" he said. "Pay? You forget, you big slob, that I
am banker in this game--and I am not the kind of banker that pays."

"What do you think you are going to do with me?" asked Banks, with
outward calm.

"Lots of things," replied Wigmore. "I will reduce your flesh, for one
thing; and your fat pride for another. I'll make you whimper and crawl
'round on your knees. But just now I'll request you to come downstairs.
Since you have broken the door of that room, I must give you another."

"I hope the other room will be an improvement on this."

"Yes. A very comfortable room."

"And what about breakfast?"

"You will have a cup of tea in half an hour--if you behave yourself in
the meantime."

Banks laughed uncertainly.

"See here, captain, don't you think this joke has gone far enough?" he
asked.

"Not at all," replied Wigmore. "My joke has just begun. Yours ended very
quickly, on the floor of my sitting room--but that was your own fault.
You are a blundering joker, Banks. You should have made sure that I was
not at home before you went round shaking all the doors, and then
crawled through the window. But that is a thing of the past, now, and so
beyond mending. I hope you will derive more entertainment from my joke
than you did from your own."

Banks had no answer to make to that. He fisted his big hands and
breathed heavily.

"I must ask you now to step back to the farther wall of your room," said
Wigmore.

Banks hesitated for a moment, then backed across the threshold and
across the little room until his shoulders touched the farther wall.

"Stay there until I give you the word," said the old man.

Then face and rifle barrel vanished, and, at the same instant, Banks
moved forward noiselessly and swiftly, lifted the couch in his strong
hands, and dropped it down the dark well of the staircase. It crashed
and banged against the wooden steps and the plaster walls; and before
its clattering had ceased the big sportsman himself was halfway down the
stairs. Halfway--and then he halted and recoiled, clutching at the cold
walls! The couch had been a second too slow in following Wigmore, and
Banks a second too slow in following the couch. The captain stood at the
bottom of the stairs, a foot beyond the wreckage of the couch, laughing
sardonically and presenting the muzzle of the rifle fair at his
captive's waist.

[Illustration: "THEN HE HALTED AND RECOILED, CLUTCHING AT THE COLD
WALLS!"]

"That was a false start," he said. "But I was expecting it,
fortunately."

Banks sat down on a dusty step, trembling violently. He felt
sick--actually sick at his stomach--with rage, chagrin, and terror of
that ready rifle and the sinister face behind it. The eyes of the old
man were more terrifying than the menacing black eye of the weapon. The
gleam at their depths was scarcely human.

"Well?" asked Banks, at last, weakly. He passed a gloved hand across his
forehead. "Well? What are you going to do?"

"That depends on you," said the captain. "If you throw furniture at me
every time I turn my back, I'll be forced to knock you out again and tie
you up. I can't risk being killed by you, for my life is valuable."

"Do you intend to hit me again with the sandbag?" asked the New Yorker
thickly.

"No, I don't mean to take that risk again," replied the other. "Another
crack like that might kill you--and I don't want to kill you just yet,
unless I have to. Perhaps I won't kill you at all, my dear fellow. I
may--of course; but I don't think so at the moment. I am whimsical,
however--a man of quick and innumerable moods. However, I do not expect
to thump you again with the sandbag. I have this rifle--for serious
work--and this queer-looking little pistol for the joking. It is a
chemical pistol--quite a new invention. I have tested it, and found it
to be all the manufacturers claim for it. Don't move! You can see and
hear perfectly well where you are! If I discharge it in your face, at a
range of twenty feet, or under, it will stun you, and leave you stunned
for an hour or more, without tearing the flesh or breaking any bones.
The thing that hits you is gas--I forget just what kind. It is pretty
potent, anyway--and I don't suppose you are particular as to what
variety of gas you are shot with. It is a fine invention, and works like
a charm. I am quite eager to test it again."

"Don't! Don't! Great heavens, man, have you gone mad?" cried Mr. Banks.

Old Wigmore raised the odd, sinister-looking pistol in his left hand.

"I don't think it hurts very much," he said. "Feels like being
smothered, I believe. Of course the shock may be quite severe at such
close range as this."

Banks closed his eyes. He was less of a coward than most men; but to sit
there on the narrow stairs, chilled and helpless, and wait for the
discharge of an unknown weapon in his face was more than courage and
nerves could stand.

"Shoot!" he screamed. "Shoot, and be done with it!"

He cut a queer figure, humped there bulkily, in his great fur coat, with
the fur cap pulled low about his ears, his eyes shut tight, and his big
face colorless with fatigue and apprehension--a queer, pathetic, tragic
figure. He waited for the explosion, every sense and every nerve
stretched till his very skin ached. His mind was in a whirl. The
thumping of his heart sounded in his ears like the roaring and pounding
of surf.

"Shoot! Shoot!" he whispered, with dry lips and leathern tongue.

And still he waited--waited. At last he could bear the strain no longer.
He uttered a harsh cry, stumbled to his feet, and opened his eyes,
leaning one shoulder heavily against a wall of the staircase. A gasp of
relief escaped him. Wigmore had retreated, and now stood several yards
away from the bottom step. The muzzle of the rifle was still toward his
victim, but his left hand, gripping that terrible, mysterious, little
weapon, was lowered to his side. He chuckled. His face looked like that
of a very old, very unhuman, and very goatish satyr.

"Wipe your eyes, my dear Banks," he said. "I won't hurt you, you poor
little thing. Dry your eyes, and come down the rest of the way. I'll
stand here, at the head of these stairs, while you toddle into that
room. Then I'll lock the door, which is very strong, and get you your
cup of tea. Come along! Come along! I haven't the heart to hurt such a
white-livered whimperer."

For a moment the big sportsman glared at him, contemplating a mad rush,
at the risk of a bullet through his breast--but only for a moment.
Something in the old man's leer told him that the finger on the trigger
would not hesitate, the muzzle would not waver. To attack now would be
suicide. He realized that he was at the mercy of a madman.

"I'm coming. I'll be mightly glad of the tea," he said, with a painful
attempt at a smile.

He made his way falteringly to the bottom of the steps, across the hall,
and into the room indicated by the old man. All the fight and all the
strength had gone out of him--for the time being, at least. The terrible
play on the stairs had taken more stamina out of him than a day's march
through a tangled wilderness, with a seventy-pound pack on his
shoulders. He staggered to the bed, and sat down dizzily on the edge of
it. Old Wigmore stood on the threshold, leering.

"I hope you like the room," he said. "I spent most of the night in
fixing it up for you."

"Thanks. It looks fine," replied Banks. And it really was fine, he
noticed, gazing around with reviving hope. There was a window--a real
window--in the wall. He could soon attract attention from that window,
or let himself out of it by a rope made of bedclothes. He had read of
that dodge a dozen times. The old fellow was mad certainly; but there
did not seem to be much method in his madness, after all. Banks turned
his face away so as to hide a wan smile.

"Sit where you are, my boy, and I'll bring your tea in a minute," said
the old man.

Then he stepped back and closed the door. Banks continued to sit on the
bed and gaze around the room, uncertain whether to go to the window now
or wait until Wigmore had brought the tea and again retired. He did not
want to bungle things by being in too great a hurry. With a little
patience and cunning on his part, his mad old jailer would soon be in
his power. He decided to wait where he was. The bed was soft, and he was
woefully tired. He turned sideways, threw his feet up, and sank head and
shoulders back upon the tempting pillows.

With a sharp click, followed by a soft thud, the middle of the bed sank
to the floor, and the bulging sides folded inward upon the astonished
Mr. Banks. He shouted and struggled; but his head was lower than his
heels, and his arms were pinned firmly against his sides. At last he
twisted over until he lay on his left shoulder, and his right arm was
clear. In another minute he would have been out of the ridiculous trap;
but suddenly Captain Wigmore appeared, slipped a rope around the
imbedded ankles, and bound them tight; and another around the free arm,
and made it fast to the head of the bed. Then the old man stood and
leered down at him.

"You are a terrible fellow for smashing furniture," he said. "You have a
very violent temper. Out you come! Out you come!"

With incredible strength, the old man gripped the big, floundering
sportsman, and yanked him from the bed, where he lay helpless, with his
feet tied together, and his right wrist fast to the bed.

"There you are!" remarked Wigmore briskly. "Now, will you be good? Sit
up, while I fix the bed. Sit up, do you hear? Then I'll give you your
breakfast. You don't deserve it--but I have a tender heart."

He prodded Banks with the toe of his boot. Banks sat up without a word.
His rage clouded his mind and deadened his tongue. Wigmore dragged the
heavy bedding to the floor, and gazed with admiration at the bedstead.
All the slats, save a few at the foot, were hinged in the middle.

"My own invention," said the old man. "Very ingenious, don't you think?
But it has done its work, so let it lie. Here are some blankets for you,
Banks. Hope you don't object to sleeping on the floor."

He tossed an armful of blankets into his prisoner's lap, and walked
briskly from the room. He was back in half a minute, carrying a tray,
which he placed on the floor within reach of Bank's free hand.

"Help yourself," he said. Then he went out, shutting the door behind
him.

Mr. Banks sat motionless for a full minute, staring at the tray. A small
teapot stood there, with steam rising from its spout. It was flanked on
the right by a small jug of cream, and on the left by an empty cup. In
front squatted a round dish under a cover. At last Banks pulled off his
fur cap, and wiped the cold perspiration from his brow with the palm of
a grimy hand.

"I suppose the old devil has doped it," he whispered, with a sigh. "Of
course he has! What's the good of supposing?"

With an effort, he turned his face away from the teapot and the covered
dish. He shifted back a little, so that the rope did not pull on his
right arm. He gazed intently at the window, door, walls, and ceiling.

"I must plan a way to get out," he muttered. "I must plan a way to fool
this old fiend."

But he could not concentrate his thoughts, for most of them were with
his heart--yearning toward the teapot and the covered dish. At last he
gave way, and allowed his gaze to rest again upon the silent tempters.
His left hand went out to them, then came slowly back. He sighed,
unfastened his coonskin coat, and cursed old Wigmore huskily, but
heartily. Again the hand advanced. He lifted the teapot and poured some
of the steaming amber liquid into the cup.

"It looks all right," he murmured. "But what's the use of looking at it?
Of course the old beast has doped it! Heaven help him when I get hold of
him!"

He set the teapot down, and groaned. He told himself to turn away; to
forget the craving in his stomach; that he was not really hungry. He
assured himself that it is beneficial to go without food now and
then--for a day, or even for two days. Then he remembered having read
somewhere that smoking allays the gnawing of hunger. He produced a cigar
from the case in his pocket, and lit it fumblingly. While he smoked he
kept his eyes fixed upon the tray. Suddenly he leaned forward and lifted
the cover from the dish.

"Buttered toast!" he exclaimed, in so tragic a voice that the sound of
it brought a smile to his dry lips. He replaced the cover with such
violence as to crack the dish. After smoking gloomily for another minute
or two, he again allowed his attentions to dwell upon the tea, toast,
and cream. He lifted the half-filled cup and sniffed it. Did he detect a
bitterness in the clean, faint fragrance of it, or was the bitterness
only in his imagination? He tilted the cup this way and that, searching
the clear liquid for some cloudy sign of danger. He was unsuccessful. He
sniffed it again, and this time could not detect the least suggestion of
bitterness.

"I am a fool!" he muttered. "My nerves have gone to pieces!"

With a quick hand, he slopped a little of the cream into the tea, and
raised the cup swiftly to his lips. But he did not part his lips. For a
moment he sat motionless, with the cup raised and tilted--and then, with
an oath, he replaced it on the tray, untasted. The momentary
gratification of thirst and hunger was not worth the risk. He turned his
back upon the tray, and puffed away resolutely at his cigar. He would
show the old devil that he was not entirely a fool!

Banks finished the cigar; and still old Wigmore had not returned. The
tray still remained on the floor. Banks hitched himself to the head of
the bed, and set to work with his left hand to unfasten the knots in the
rope which bound him to that cursed, ingenious bedstead. The rope was
small, and the knots were hard; but at last the outer knot began to
loosen. He paused frequently in his work to glance over his shoulder at
the door, and to hearken intently. At last he was free from the bed, but
with the length of line still hanging from his wrist. Now he crawled
across the room to the door, stood up on his bound feet, and tried the
handle. The door was locked, as he had expected. Seated with his broad
back against it, he worried the cord at his ankles with both hands
until its three stubborn knots were undone. Then, moving on tiptoe, he
carried the heavy bedstead across the room, and stood it solidly against
the door.




CHAPTER XVII

AN ASTONISHING DISCOVERY


The room was not elaborately furnished, but every piece was good of its
kind. Mr. Banks worked busily, moving about stealthily on the toes of
his great boots. He had shed his coat, by this time, and rid his right
arm of the dangling length of rope. Atop the hinged slats of the bed he
placed a substantial chest of drawers, thus renforcing the barricade
and squaring himself with the ingenious slats by one and the same move.

"It will take a bigger man than Wigmore to get in at me now," murmured
the sportsman.

He was tremendously pleased with his job, but did not waste much time in
admiring it. Now that he was secure from interruption for a while, at
least, was the time to develop the possibilities of the window. He would
try to attract the attention of some passer-by. If there did not happen
to be any passer-by, which was frequently the case, in Samson's Mill
Settlement, for hours at a time--then he would join the pieces of rope
with which he had been bound, lengthen the result with a blanket, and
lower himself into the free outside world. Old Wigmore might shoot at
him through the panels of the door, but he was more than willing to take
the risk of being hit by such blind shooting. Once outside, he felt that
he would be safe. Not even the mad captain was mad enough to murder him
in open sight of the road and fields. These reflections occupied his
mind during the seconds in which he turned from his contemplation of the
barricade. He made one step toward the window, and then----

"Halt!" exclaimed the voice of Captain Wigmore, shrill, clear and
menacing. Banks halted, with a gasp, and turned his face toward the
hateful sound. To his dismay, he beheld the devilish face of the old man
leering horribly within seven feet of him, through a square and
unsuspected aperture in the door. With a low cry of defiance and nervous
fright, he tried to set his limbs in motion again. Would his feet never
move? He seemed to pass through a whole minute of terrific but futile
exertion. It was like a grotesque nightmare of childhood
days--grotesque, but horrible. He saw the old man's hand appear beside
the leering face. In the hand was that queerly shaped pistol. And still
his feet clung to the floor as if they were lead! A dull, feeble,
popping report came to his aching ears. And then something gripped his
windpipe with huge, hard fingers; some one struck him to earth with a
gigantic balloon; a blank wave curled about him, fell upon him, pounded
the life from his battling lungs, and dragged him, limp and dead, to the
unsounded depths.

Captain Wigmore had discharged his chemical pistol in the big
sportsman's face. That is all. He had slipped the panel, cried halt,
raised his hand, and pulled the trigger, all within two seconds of time.

When Mr. Banks recovered consciousness for the second time since
crawling into Wigmore's house, he felt much worse than he had on the
first occasion. He felt very, very sick at the very pit of his stomach.
His poor head was in a terrible way. At one moment his brains seemed to
be floating far above him, light and thin as smoke, and at the next they
lay heavily, but loosely, in his sore skull, like a fragment of iron,
sliding from side to side. He lay flat, and groaned. Half an hour passed
before he ventured to sit up and open his eyes. Absolute darkness
surrounded him. He felt about with his hands, and found that he was
lying on a folded blanket. He inquired further, and discovered that his
new lodging was nothing but a tiny closet, about seven feet deep, and
four feet wide, with a steeply sloping roof. The roof was made of a
series of sharp-cornered humps. He bumped his head against one of
them--and that enlightened him. He was in a closet under a staircase.
His fur coat had been left in the bedroom; but, fortunately, the closet
was not very cold. After another and briefer rest upon the flat of his
back, he decided to try a smoke. He thrust a hand slowly into one
pocket, less slowly into another, then swiftly and desperately into
pocket after pocket. All were empty! Not so much as a match had been
left to him; not so much as a crumb of tobacco.

The rage which this discovery inspired in the breast of Mr. Banks was
out of all proportion to the seriousness of his loss. The effect upon
him was stupendous. Sandbagging, binding, and pistoling had all failed
to lift him to such a height of resentment at this. Why, even he could
not have explained. His big boots were left to him--and his voice, such
as it was. He began to shout and stamp his feet on the floor. His voice
limbered up, and grew in strength, until the dry-tongued cry became a
gigantic bellow. The feet pounded up and down until they encountered the
door; and then they began to swing back and forth. The door winced and
shook at every blow. It was a strong door, however, hung on massive
hinges, fastened with a big lock, and barred in three places with rods
of iron. Wigmore had taken no chances with this door. He had fixed
things this time so that his prisoner was put to stay. That was his
idea, anyway.

At last, reeling and breathless from his exertions, Banks sank to the
floor, and lay still and silent. For a little while his head span
sickeningly, and his mind and senses lay torpid; but only for a little
while. This outbreak had done him good--had revived him to the finger
tips. He sat up presently and listened for the approach of his enemy.
Surely all that bellowing and thumping would bring him.

"If he opens that door, pistol or no pistol, it'll be the end of him,"
remarked the New Yorker. And he meant it. He was ready for murder. He
raised himself to his knees, ascertained the position of the door with
his hand, and faced it, waiting in savage expectancy.

At last his straining ears caught a sound. It was a very faint sound,
and it came from the left instead of from the door. It was repeated--a
faint, furtive tapping, like the tapping of a flipped finger against
plaster. He moved cautiously toward the sound. It came again. He put out
his hand, and touched the rough lath and plaster of the wall. How frail
the barrier felt! He stood up very cautiously. "It may be a mouse--and
it may be Wigmore--but it is worth trying," he whispered. Then he swung
his right foot backward slowly, and brought it forward with all the
force that lay in that long and muscular shank. A sound of cracking
plaster and splintered laths rewarded and encouraged him. He steadied
himself, with one hand on the door and one on the slope of the
staircase, and settled down to kicking. His boot was thick, his leg
strong, and his heart in the job. Things cracked and smashed and
splintered. At last he knelt and advanced an inquiring hand. The
blackness was full of the dust of powdered plaster. He found a
ragged-edged break in the wall, and thrust his hand into it.

Mr. Banks snatched his hand back to his own side of the pierced
partition, at the same time uttering a sharp cry of dismay. Nothing had
hurt him; but in the blackness beyond his own narrow blackness his
fingers had encountered flesh--the flesh of a human nose and eyebrow. He
sagged back on his haunches, limp and trembling. Whatever he had
expected to find, this was not it.

"Who is there? Speak! Who is there?" he whispered.

No voice answered him; but again he heard that thin rapping, like the
flipping of a finger against a hard, dry surface. It was a trifle louder
this time, but in exactly the same position.

"Can't you speak? Speak, for Heaven's sake!" cried Banks.

This time he was answered by a low, muffled, strangled groan. He
searched his pockets again, with shaking fingers; and, at last, in a
little roll of woolen dust in the corner of his match pocket, he found
one wax match. This first seemed such a great and joyful thing to him
that he had difficulty in restraining his laughter.

"Wigmore, you old devil, here's where I have you at last!" he exclaimed.
"You're a fool! You should have picked my pockets thoroughly while you
were about it. This little match will prove your undoing--as sure as my
name is Harvey P. Banks!"

He began to chuckle--and the sound of his chuckling quieted and steadied
him in a flash. "That won't do," he said. "That sounds downright
idiotic. I must keep a grip on myself."

With his left hand he found a safe and suitable spot on the wall for the
striking of the precious match; and then, with his trembling right hand,
he struck it. The little flame hissed into existence, then caught the
wax, and burned clear and quiet. He crouched low, and thrust the burning
match through the hole in the lath and plaster, and into the chamber
beyond, by the length of his arm. The hole was about three feet long and
twelve or fifteen inches wide. He shuffled forward and thrust his head
between the jaws of ragged plaster and splintered laths.

The match lit a closet even smaller than the one in which Banks lay.
Banks beheld rough walls, a sloping roof, a door, and, directly under
his hand, a small human figure, bound and gagged.

"Timothy Fletcher!" he exclaimed. "So this is New York--for you!"

The old man's bright eyes blinked like an owl's. He lay close against
the wall, and now Banks saw one finger--one free finger--dart out and
tap the plaster.

"Roll away from the hole," said Banks. Then the match scorched him, and
he withdrew his hand and head. He sat back for a second or two,
considering the situation.

"The old fiend!" he muttered. "He must be mad--or the devil himself.
This explains the other thing that happened to poor Fletcher--the attack
in the woods. Oh, the cunning old beast!"

Now he set to work with his hands, tearing away the light materials of
the wall in strips and lumps. He put his hand through, found that
Fletcher had rolled away, and then wriggled through himself. It was a
tight passage, but at last it was safely accomplished. To remove the gag
from Fletcher's stiff jaws was the work of a few seconds. To untie and
unwind the complicated knots and cords that bound the old fellow's body
and limbs took fully half an hour. During that time, Fletcher did not
say one word.

For a little while after the freeing of Timothy Fletcher, Banks sagged
weakly against the floor. His head was spinning again. He closed his
eyes against the blackness, and began to drift off into a delightful,
restful dream. He was all done--all in--down and out! What was the good
of worrying? What was the good of anything? He had escaped from his
cell. He had found Fletcher and set him free. He had earned his rest.

Timothy Fletcher dragged himself over to where Mr. Banks sagged against
the door like a big, half-empty sack. Having spent half an hour in
moving his tongue up and down, and round and round in his mouth, he now
found himself in possession of a fragment of voice. Also, the blood was
beginning to move in his arms and legs again. His mind was as clear as
glass. He fastened his thin fingers in his rescuer's collar, and shook
that careless head until it flopped and knocked against the door.

"Wake up!" he croaked. "Wake up! We got to get out of here."

Banks opened his eyes, and, in the dark, grabbed Fletcher with his big
hands. For a moment he mistook the servant for the master, and, with a
sudden, furious surge of strength, he shook him as a terrier shakes a
rat. Fletcher yelled, and clawed the sportsman in the face. Then Banks
realized what he was doing.

"Sorry," he gasped. "I was half asleep. How are we to get out?"

Fletcher did not answer immediately, but lay panting in the dust. At
last he raised himself to his hands and knees. "This door," he
whispered. "It is locked--that is all. You are strong. We must get out!
Quick! Smash it!"

Mr. Banks got to his feet, and found the position of the door. He moved
slowly. He laughed softly.

"Stand out of the way--out of the danger zone," he cautioned. "I'm going
to kick. I can kick like an army mule."

"Kick! Kick!" croaked Timothy Fletcher, crouching off to one side.
"There's drink downstairs. Food an' drink."

Banks balanced himself, lifted his right knee high against his
waistcoat, and shot forward his right heel. With a rending of wood and
ripping of dislodged screws, the door flew open, letting a flood of
faint moonlight into the black closet. Banks staggered forward, fell
flat on the floor outside, then nipped to his feet again as nimble as a
cat. Weariness and sickness were forgotten. He felt superior to anything
old Wigmore might try to do.

Fletcher staggered up, and reeled against the New Yorker.

"He'll shoot--if he's home," he gabbled. "Get hold of a chair--to let
fly at him. Kill him if you see him! He's mad! Kill him like a rat!"

"You bet," replied Banks. "If I see him--then God pity him! Ah!"

He saw a heavy chair standing by the moonlit window. He ran forward,
seized it by the back, and lifted it. He whirled it around his head. He
felt strong enough to annihilate a score of maniacs.

"This will do. Come on," he whispered.

They went down a flight of heavily carpeted stairs to the lower hall.
The winter moonshine lit the place faintly. Banks went ahead, with the
big chair ready in front of him, and poor old Timothy crawling at his
heels. The house was quiet as death. They reached the hall. Banks'
anxious eye caught sight of the shadow of a curtain at the door of the
dining room. The big chair hurtled through the air, and burst against
the casing of the door.

"My mistake!" he cried, and the next moment had armed himself with
another chair. They entered the dining room, found it empty, and closed
and fastened the door. They rifled the sideboard of apples, soda
biscuits, bread, butter, and a half bottle of sherry. Timothy Fletcher
wet his insides with a dozen great gulps of the wine, direct from the
bottle, and then crammed fragments of dry bread into his mouth.

"Go easy," cautioned Banks, between mouthfuls. "Dangerous. Chew your
food."

At last he got possession of the bottle. The wonder is that the meal did
not kill them. As it was, Timothy Fletcher lay down on the carpet, and
swore that he would not move another step until he was dashed well
ready, and felt a good deal better. Mr. Banks became indignant.

"I save your life, and then you go and eat yourself to death!" he cried.
"It's enough to make any one angry. If you don't get up and come along
out of this cursed house, I'll go without you."

Timothy rolled and twisted on the carpet.

"Don't," he whined, changing his tune. "I feel terrible bad, Mr. Banks.
Don't leave me. He may come home soon. What time is it?"

Banks had forgotten that such a thing as time existed. He heard a clock
ticking, tracked it to the chimneypiece, and carried it to the window.
The moonlight was strong enough to read the hands by.

"Half-past nine," he said. "Half-past nine at night, of course--but of
what night? Can it be only twenty-four hours since I crawled into this
infernal house through a back window? I can't believe it! I've been
sandbagged, and shot, and starved! Twenty-four hours!"

"I got an awful cramp," groaned Fletcher. "Get me some whisky! Quick!
Cupboard in the corner."

"I told you not to make a pig of yourself," said Banks. But he found the
cupboard, brought the whisky, and held the decanter to the old man's
lips. He soon withdrew it, in spite of the other's expostulations.

"Half-past nine," he said. "Do you get that? When does Wigmore usually
come home?"

"When do he come home?" repeated Timothy. "Blast him! Just when you
don't expect him! That's when he comes home. After nine, you say? Then
he must be out for the evening. We'd better go--soon. Let's have another
drop of that whisky first."

"No more whisky for you. How are the cramps?"

"Bad! Bad! The soda crackers lay on my insides like bits of flint. I was
near gone, Mr. Banks. He left me days and days without bite nor sup--may
hell's flames scorch him!"

"But we must get away! He may be back at any moment. Once outside the
house, we're safe."

"He has that pistol in his pocket. We'd soon be back again, if he met
us."

"Rot!" exclaimed Banks. "Come along! Buck up!"

"Can't do it, sir. Not just now--anyhow. I feel that bad--I'd like to
die."

The New Yorker relented, knelt beside him, and let him drink a little
more of the whisky.

"Now, lie quiet until you feel better," he said. "I'll keep a watch out
for Wigmore--and if I see him coming, I'll meet him at the door--with a
chair. But you let me know as soon as you feel fit to move."

He took his stand at a window beside the front door. The night was
almost as bright as day, and he could see clearly for hundreds of yards
up the white road. So he stood for fifteen minutes, and nobody came in
sight.

"Never before in all my life did I put in such a day as this," he
reflected.

Then he heard Timothy's husky voice.

"I feel a mite better now. Maybe we'd best get out, Mr. Banks."




CHAPTER XVIII

DICK GOODINE RETURNS UNEXPECTEDLY


To hark back! After Mr. Banks' departure on his secret mission, Reginald
Rayton climbed out of bed and dressed himself as well as he could. As it
was hopeless to attempt a coat, he folded several blankets about his
shoulders, the red one outside. Then he went down to the sitting room,
where a good fire was burning, and shouted for his new stableboy. Bill
Long entered from the kitchen and sat down, when requested, on the outer
edge of an armchair. He answered a dozen questions concerning the horses
and cattle fluently; but when his employer asked him suddenly if he knew
of any one who held a grudge against him--Rayton--the youth rubbed one
gray-socked foot across the other and scratched the back of his head
uneasily.

"You will be helping me out if you say what you think, Bill," encouraged
Rayton.

"Well," replied Bill, "they do say as how you an' Doc Nash ain't any too
friendly."

"That was nothing, Bill. Just a fit of bad temper. We are on very good
terms now. Who else, d'you think?"

"There's Davy Marsh. He's got a mighty sore head. I hear him talkin'
pretty wicked about ye, one day."

"But he don't mean it, you may be sure. It was just his trouble made him
talk like that. He and I are on a very friendly footing. He has nothing
to be sore at me about."

"I guess he thinks he has, Mr. Rayton. You've cut him out--or he thinks
so. But he weren't never in to be cut out."

"Oh, come now, Bill! I don't think you should talk that way about Marsh.
He means well enough. Who else?"

"Well, Mr. Rayton, what about old Cap'n Wigmore? He be mighty sweet on
Miss Nell Harley--an' he's an all-fired wicked-lookin' old cuss. I guess
if you knowed his heart you'd find him yer enemy."

Rayton laughed. "Poor old chap! I am sorry for him. But come now, Bill,
you are not serious?"

"Yep. He be soft as mush on that girl. Father, he says so, too--an' so
does ma."

"But you don't think he'd shoot me, do you?"

"Guess he would--if he got a good chance. Guess he'd as lief kill a
feller as eat his supper--judgin' by the looks of him. Tell you what,
Mr. Rayton, if I was you I wouldn't trust that old gent no farther'n I
could chuck him over my shoulder. He's got a bad eye, he has, jist like
Jim Wiggins' old hoss had--an' it ended by chawin' off two of his
fingers when he wasn't lookin'."

"Whose fingers, Bill?"

"Jim's, in course."

"Oh! Of course. But, see here, Bill; you surely don't think old Captain
Wigmore shot me in the shoulder?"

"That's what I think, Mr. Rayton. It be jist the kinder skunk trick he'd
do. _I've_ watched him, many's the time--when he didn't know it. He
talks to himself--an' sometimes he laughs, an' dances 'round on his
toes. That's gospel, Mr. Rayton. An' he makes faces--lor'! I'll bet ye a
dollar, Mr. Rayton, that 'twas him shot you. He's bin a pirate, I
guess--an' 'u'd jist as soon kill a man as Jack Swim 'u'd kill a pig.
He's got a anchor thing inked in on his arm, anyhow--all red an' blue. I
seen it one day when he didn't know I was lookin'."

"You seem to be greatly interested in him, Bill. You seem to have
watched him pretty closely."

"That's right. First time I seen him and heard his name was Cap'n
Wigmore, I began to spy on him. He brought to my mind some other cap's
I've read about--Cap'n Kidd, an' Cap'n Flint. Yes, Mr. Rayton, I've
watched him, you bet--'cept when he was lookin' at me. I'd jist as lief
have a b'ar look at me as that old cuss!"

"For all that," replied Rayton, smiling, "I don't think Captain Wigmore
is the man who shot me. He has an uncertain temper, I know, but I don't
believe he would try to kill a man in cold blood. I can't think of any
one who would try, deliberately, to kill me. It must have been an
accident, Bill. That's what I think, anyway."

"Accident nothin'," returned Bill. "Pirates kill folks, don't they? You
bet they do! Mr. Banks ain't so soft as you, Mr. Rayton. He's nosin'
round, I kin see that. I'll bet he's spyin' on Cap'n Wigmore this very
minute. Smart gent, Mr. Banks. Most Yanks be smarter nor Englishmen,
anyhow, I guess."

Rayton's laughter was interrupted by Turk. The dog jumped up from the
rug before the fire, stood for a moment, then ran into the kitchen, with
his plume waving. The kitchen door opened and closed, Turk yelped a
welcome, and next moment Dick Goodine entered the sitting room. The
trapper carried his snowshoes under one arm and his blanket-cased rifle
under the other.

"You, Dick!" exclaimed Rayton. "Has anything gone wrong? What's brought
you back, old chap?"

"Yes, it's me," answered the trapper, with an uneasy laugh. "Didn't make
much of a start, did I? But nothing's gone wrong. I made camp twenty
miles out, on Dorker Crick--an' then I lit out on the back trail--just
to tell you something that's on my mind."

He leaned in the doorway, smiling at the Englishman and swinging his fur
cap in his hand. Snowshoes and rifle lay on the floor. Rayton gazed at
him with a puzzled shadow in his clear, kindly eyes.

"Why, Dick, that's too bad," he said. "But pull off your togs and get
something to eat--and then let me hear what you have on your mind. If I
can help you, I'll do it. If it's money for more traps, I'm your man,
Dick."

"It isn't money," said the trapper quietly. He threw off his mittens and
outer coat, and drew a chair close to Rayton. "It is something pretty
private," he said, "_and_ important. It brought me all the way out of
the woods, to see you."

Rayton was more deeply puzzled than ever, and a sharp anxiety awoke in
him. Had this fate that had struck others also struck Dick Goodine? He
inspected his friend anxiously, and was relieved to find that he had
suffered no physical injury, at any rate.

"Bill," he said, "skip out and make a pot of coffee, there's a good
chap. Shut the door after you."

Bill Long obeyed with dragging feet. He took half a minute to cross the
threshold and shut the door.

"Now, Dick, fire away," said Rayton. "Get it off your chest. I'm your
man, whatever your trouble may be."

The trapper leaned forward. Though his lips smiled, there were tears in
his dark eyes.

"Is the shoulder gettin' along all right?" he asked huskily. "And the
cold? How's it, Reginald?"

Rayton laughed with a note of astonishment and relief. "Did you come all
the way out to ask about my shoulder and my cold?" he cried. "Well, you
are a considerate chap, I must say! But it was foolish of you, Dick. I'm
right as wheat; but it is mighty good of you to feel so anxious, my dear
old chap--and you may be sure I'll never forget it."

Still the trapper smiled, and still the moisture gleamed in his dark
eyes.

"I--I felt anxious--oh, yes," he said slowly. "I couldn't think o'
nothin' else all the time I was trailin' along through the woods an' all
last night in camp. That's right. So I just up an' lit out to tell
you--to tell you the truth. I was a fool an' a coward not to tell it
before. I'm the man who shot you!"

"What?" cried Rayton, staring. "You? For Heaven's sake, Dick, don't be a
fool! Have you been hitting the jug again?"

"It's the truth," said the trapper quietly. "I shot you--an' I was scart
to own up to it. I didn't know it was you until--until I _guessed_ it. I
thought I had come pretty near hittin' somebody--but not you. I didn't
know who. I heard the yells--an' they sounded strong enough. I'll tell
you just how it was, Reginald."

He paused, breathing quickly, and brushed his hand across his face.
Rayton went to the door and turned the key.

"Buck up, Dick," he said. "If you shot me--well, that's all right. No
harm done; but tell me all about it if it will make you feel any
better."

"It was this way," began the trapper. "I was trailin' 'round, lookin'
for a buck deer or anything that might happen along--and after a while I
seen what I took to be the neck an' shoulders of a buck. The light was
bad, you know. The thing moved a little. I was sure I could see its
horns. So I let fly. Down he went--an' then I heard the durndest
hollerin' an' cussin'--an' I knew I'd made a mistake. But the cussin'
was that strong I thought I'd missed. I cal'lated the best thing I could
do was just to get away quietly an' keep my mouth shut; and just then
came a bang like a cannon an' half a peck of pa'tridge shot peppered the
bushes all round me. Then I was more'n sure I didn't hit the man,
whoever he was, so I just lit out fer home, runnin' as quiet as I could.

"I got home all right, thinkin' it was all a mighty good joke on me, an'
turned in soon after supper. But I couldn't get to sleep. I began to
wonder if I'd missed the mark, after all. The light was bad, of course;
but I don't often miss a shot like that at two hundred yards. I
commenced workin' it out in my mind, an' thinkin' it over an' over every
way.

"Moose an' caribou, an' even deer, run miles with these here nickled
bullets in them--aye, an' right through 'em; an' I've read about
soldiers fightin' for five or ten minutes after they was hit. Then why
shouldn't the man I fired at by mistake holler an' cuss an' let fly at
me, even if he was plugged? That's the way I figgered it out--an' pretty
soon I began to think I had hit him.

"I couldn't get it out of my head. I saw him layin' out on the ground,
maybe bleedin' to death. I reckoned the thing to do was hike over an'
tell you an' Mr. Banks about it an' see what you thought of it. So,
after studyin' on it a while longer, I got up an' dressed an' sneaked
out of the house. When I got to your house there was a light in the
settin'-room window. That scart me, for it was past two o'clock in the
mornin'--pretty near three. I let myself in, quiet; an' there was Mr.
Banks in the things he goes to bed in--the cotton pants an' little
cotton jumpers--asleep in his chair by the settin'-room fire. That gave
me another scare. I woke him up. He jumped like I'd stuck a pin into
him.

"'Hullo, Dick,' says he. 'I thought it was Reginald. Where is Reginald,
anyhow?'

"'Well, where is he?' says I, feelin' kinder faint in my stomach. 'Maybe
he's gone to bed. It's three o'clock, anyhow.'

"Then he told me as how you an' him had gone out gunnin' together that
mornin,' an' how you hadn't come home yet. Then I felt pretty sick; an'
I up an' told him what I was a feared of--but I was too scart and
rattled to tell him all I knew about it. It was only guessin',
anyhow--though I felt as certain I'd shot you as if I'd seen myself do
it. I made up a bit of a yarn for him.

"I told him as how I was in the woods when, about sundown, I heard a
rifle shot, an' then a lot of hollerin', an' then a gun shot. I told him
what I thought--that maybe somebody had plugged somebody--and how that
somebody might be you. Well, he fired a few questions at me, an' then he
grabs the lamp an' hits the trail for upstairs. Inside ten minutes he's
down again; an' we get lanterns an' brandy an' blankets, an' out we
start. It took us a long time to find you--but we did--thank God!

"That's the truth of it, Reginald; an' I couldn't rest easy till you
knew of it--an' until I'd had another look at you. What with all the
queer things goin' on 'round here of late--an' them cards dealt to
you--an' the bad name I have, I was scart to own up to it before."

"I understand," said Rayton slowly--"and I don't blame you, Dick."

He put out his free hand, and they shook heartily.

"You're a rare one," said the trapper. "You're white, clean through."

The Englishman laughed confusedly.

"Now, we'd better let Bill Long in and try that coffee," he suggested.
"About what you've just told me, Dick--well, I think we'd better keep it
quiet for a few days. We'll tell Banks, of course; but nobody else.
Unlock the door, will you, Dick?"

They drank coffee and smoked. Bill Long went to bed, yawning, before
eleven.

"Where's Mr. Banks, anyhow?" inquired Dick Goodine. "Is he makin' a call
over to the Harleys'?"

"He went out to find the man who shot me," replied Reginald, with a
smile; "but, as he has missed him, no doubt he is at the Harleys'. What
time is it? Eleven! He should be home by now."

Half an hour later they both began to feel anxious. Banks was not in the
habit of staying out after eleven o'clock. There was nothing in
Samson's Mill Settlement to keep a man out late.

"He went out lookin' fer trouble," remarked the trapper, "an' maybe he's
found it. Guess I may's well go over to Harleys' an' take a look
'round."

"Perhaps he has gone to see Nash," suggested Rayton.

"Or old Wigmore."

"That's so. Better turn out Bill Long, too. He can go one way and you
another, Dick. Banks went out in search of trouble, as you say--and
perhaps he has found it. What sort of night is it?"

"Cloudin' over. Looks like snow--and it's milder."

Fifteen minutes later the trapper and Bill Long left the house, each
carrying a stable lantern. Bill Long returned within an hour. He had
been to Doctor Nash's, Samson's, and several other houses, and had
failed to see or hear anything of the New York sportsman. Twenty minutes
later Dick Goodine returned, accompanied by Jim Harley. Jim had come in
from one of his lumber camps early that evening, having heard of
Reginald Rayton's accident. He looked worn and anxious; but expressed
his relief at finding the Englishman alive.

"It is more than I expected when I first heard you had been shot," he
said frankly.

Goodine told of the unsuccessful search for Banks. At the Harley house
he had learned that Banks had not been there during the evening. Captain
Wigmore had been there, however, for a little while, and had mentioned
seeing Banks on the road. Then Jim Harley and Dick Goodine had called on
the captain to make further inquiries.

By that time, it was snowing moderately. They had banged at the door for
fully ten minutes; and at last the old man, yawning and draped about in
a dressing gown, had let them in. No, he had seen nothing more of the
New Yorker. He had persuaded them to enter and sit down for a little
while, and had mixed hot toddy. He had suggested that Banks was safe
home by that time. Then the two had left the yawning captain to return
to his bed--and that was all.

"Well, he's not here," said Rayton. "What's to be done now? What do you
suggest, Jim?"

Jim had nothing to suggest. His anxiety was written large on his face.

"Maybe he's gone into the woods an' got himself lost," said the
trapper. "Anyhow, I reckon the best thing we can do is turn out an' hunt
'round again. Maybe he's hurt himself."

"That's right," returned Jim Harley. He laid his hand on Rayton's
shoulder. "And the best thing you can do is to go to bed," he added
solicitously.

Harley, Goodine, and Bill Long went out again with their lanterns. The
snow had ceased, but the stars were still thinly veiled.

"I can't understand this," whispered Harley to the trapper. "Mr. Banks
should be safe, anyway. He has never got the marked card."

"Can't a man get into trouble without the help of them danged cards? You
seem to have 'em on the brain, Jim!" retorted Dick.

Jim sighed resignedly. The fate that made, dealt, and followed those
little red crosses was a real and terrible thing to him.

The three took different roads after agreeing to inquire at every house
they came to, and, if possible, to get others to help in the search. It
was now after one o'clock.

Dick Goodine searched the sides of the road, the edges of fields, the
pastures, and every clump of bushes and of timber he came to. He
aroused the inmates of one house, made fruitless inquiries, and was
informed that the only adult males of the family were away in the lumber
woods, and so could not turn out to hunt for the missing sportsman. At
last he found himself standing again before Captain Wigmore's residence.
He could not say what influence or suggestion had led him back to this
spot. He had followed his feet--that is all. One window on the second
floor was faintly lighted.

"I'd like to know what that old cuss is doin' up this time of night," he
muttered.

He banged at the knocker of the front door until the captain came
downstairs.

"You again, Richard!" exclaimed the old man. "Come in. Come in. Still
looking for Mr. Banks?"

"Yes. He ain't turned up yet," answered the trapper, stepping into the
hall.

"I'll dress and help you hunt for him," said the captain. "He is a
particular friend of mine. I can't get to sleep for worrying about
him."




CHAPTER XIX

THE CAPTAIN'S CHARGE


Captain Wigmore lit a lamp in the sitting room, and then went upstairs
to dress. As soon as he was gone, the trapper commenced a noiseless tour
of the room, of the hall, and of the rooms in the front of the house. He
even searched beneath articles of furniture and behind every open door.
He explored the kitchen, the pantry, and the pot closet behind the
stove.

"Guess I'm on the wrong track this time," he admitted at last, and when
Wigmore came down he was sitting patiently on the edge of his chair,
with his toes turned demurely inward and his hands on his knees. The
captain eyed him keenly for a moment.

"Want anything?" he asked. "A drink, or anything?"

"No; thanks all the same, captain," returned the trapper.

"I heard you wandering around," said Wigmore. "I thought that perhaps
you were looking for something. You were admiring my pictures, I
suppose?"

The trapper's face flushed swiftly. "Guess again," he answered calmly.
His gaze met the old man's, and did not waver. The captain was the first
to look away. He sighed as he did so.

"I am afraid you do not trust me entirely," he said. "But we must go and
look for poor Banks. He may be freezing to death somewhere. Come along,
Richard. There is no time to lose."

As the two passed from the house, Goodine was in front, and for a moment
his back was turned fairly to the captain. He heard a little gasp, and
turned swiftly. The captain withdrew a hand quickly from an inner
pocket, and stooped to lock the door.

"What's the trouble?" asked Dick.

"A twinge in my knee. I am growing old," answered Wigmore in pathetic
tones. And to this day, the trapper has never fully realized how near he
was at that moment to a sudden and choking oblivion.

The old man began to limp after half an hour of tramping the frozen
roads and scrambling through underbrush and deep snow. At last he sat
down on a hemlock stump and confessed that he had reached the end of his
endurance and must go home. He was sorry; but it was better to drag
himself home now than keep at it a few minutes longer and then have to
be carried. Goodine agreed with him; and after a short rest the old man
set out on his homeward journey. As long as he was in range of the
trapper's vision he staggered wearily; but once beyond it he scuttled
along like a little dog. He was anxious to get home and assure himself
that none of his neighbors were exploring his house during his absence.

Dick Goodine continued his unsuccessful searching of woods, roads, and
fields until dawn. He crossed the trails of other searchers several
times, but not once the trail of Mr. Banks' big and familiar hunting
boots. Upon returning to Rayton's, he found Jim Harley, Benjamin Samson,
Doctor Nash, and several other men drinking coffee in the kitchen.
Reginald had been driven off to his bed by Nash only a few minutes
before. An air of gloom and mystery pervaded the room. Doctor Nash alone
showed an undaunted bearing. He talked loudly, and slammed the back of
his right hand into the palm of his left continually.

"Banks is no fool!" he exclaimed, for the tenth time. "Do you think
he'd walk out of this house and lose himself on a night like this? Rot!
Tell me who set fire to Davy Marsh's camp, who tied old Fletcher up in
that blanket, and who shot Rayton, and I'll tell you who knows where
Banks is. It may be one man, or it may be a gang doing the work; but
there's one man at the back of it all. Same with the marks on the cards.
At first I put it all down to you, Jim; but I couldn't see why you
should tie up old Fletcher. Now, I see it pretty straight. That Fletcher
business was all a bluff. He _let_ somebody tie him up--and, as I've
told you a dozen times, that somebody is old Wigmore. What do you say,
Dick?"

The others all turned and stared at the trapper with anxious,
sleep-shadowed eyes.

"I ain't sayin' yes or no yet a while, doc," replied Goodine. "What you
say sounds pretty reasonable; but I wouldn't swear to it. I ain't a
fancy detective, but when I see a lot of smoke I can guess at fire as
well as the next man. Old Fletcher's vanished, anyhow--an' so has Mr.
Banks. I don't hold that what happened to Reginald has anything to do
with the other queer business. Accidents will happen! But I guess
Captain Wigmore is lyin' when he says Tim Fletcher went to New York;
an' I guess he was actin' the goat when he let on as how he thought Doc
Nash marked them cards. But guessin' won't find Mr. Banks!"

"Of what do you accuse Captain Wigmore?" asked Jim Harley, gripping
Dick's arm. "I've heard a lot of hinting, but no straight charge. Speak
up like a man and be done with it. Say what you mean. I'm sick of
listening to hints against the old man behind his back."

In the silence that followed, the trapper looked steadily into Harley's
eyes, and gently but firmly unfastened the grip of the fingers on his
arm.

"Keep cool, Jim," he said. "Keep a tally on yer words."

"I'll keep cool enough, Dick. Don't worry about me," retorted Jim. "But
answer a few questions, will you? A few straight questions?"

The trapper nodded.

"Do you think Captain Wigmore had anything to do with the marks on the
cards?" asked Harley. "Give me a straight yes or no to that."

"A straight yes or no! Right you are! Yes, I do!"

"You do! Why?"

"Because I do, that's all. Ask your other questions, an' be darned
quick about it. My temper's short."

"Have you any proof that he marked the cards?"

"No. And you haven't any proof that he didn't, neither."

The others crowded close around Dick Goodine and Jim Harley.

"And do you think he had anything to do with Davie Marsh's troubles?"

"Can't say. Don't know."

"Do you think he shot old Reginald Rayton?"

"No, I don't."

"Why don't you?"

"Because I shot him myself."

A gasp went up from the group of anxious and astonished men.

"You!" exclaimed Harley. "I don't believe it."

"It's the truth, anyhow. I mistook him for a buck. He knows all about
it."

"Took him for a buck?"

"That's what I said; an' if any man here thinks I'm lyin' he'd better
not say so, or he'll get his face pushed in."

"It's a mistake that's bin made before," said Samson.

Others nodded.

"Well, there you are!" said Harley. "If you hadn't wounded Rayton
yourself, you'd say that Captain Wigmore did it. But all this talk won't
help Banks. What are we to do next?"

"Have some breakfast and a nap, an' then start in huntin' him again,"
said Benjamin Samson. "We simply got to find him, or there'll be
terrible things printed in the New York papers about this here
settlement."

All left the house for their own homes except Goodine and Doctor Nash.
As Goodine busied himself at the stove, preparing breakfast, Nash said:
"That was a startler, Dick. Is it straight that you plugged Rayton in
the shoulder?"

"Just as I said, doc," replied the trapper.

"Does Wigmore know you did it?"

"Guess not, or he would have said so before this. He put it onto you."

"He did, the old skunk. But he knew he was lyin' when he said it. If it
wasn't you, Dick, I'd think Wigmore had paid some one to take a shot at
Rayton. My idea is that he works the cards and then gets some one else
to make the trouble."

"Maybe so. He didn't get me to do that shootin', anyhow. I guess he's
the man who works the cards, all right; but I'd like to know what he
does it for."

"My idea is that he had heard that story about the cards before and is
trying to scare people away from Nell Harley. The old fool is soft as
mush on her himself, you know."

"Well, doc, what we'd best do now is to eat a snack an' then turn in an'
get a couple of hours' sleep; an' if we don't find Mr. Banks to-day
we'll just up an' ask old Wigmore the reason why."

Two hours later Captain Wigmore himself arrived at Rayton's house. Nash,
Goodine, and young Bill Long were in the kitchen, pulling on their
moccasins and overcoats. The captain looked exceedingly tired, but very
wide awake.

"I've found a clue!" he exclaimed. "Look at this knife! Did you ever see
it before, any of you?"

He placed a big clasp knife on the table.

"Why, it's Banks' knife," cried Doctor Nash. "I've seen it several
times. I'd swear to it."

"Yes, it's his. And there's H. P. B. cut on the handle," said Dick.

"I found it this morning, on the Blue Hill road," said the captain.

"On the Blue Hill road? How far out?"

"About three miles from my place. I've been hunting for Banks since
sunrise, and this is all I've found."

"What in thunder would he be doing out there?"

"That's what we must find out," said the captain. "Perhaps he was drunk
and didn't know where he was going. Or perhaps he was bound for Blue
Hill station to catch a train. Heaven only knows!"

"How is the road?"

"Very fair, as far as I went."

"Then I'll hitch the horses into the sled, and we'll light out on his
trail," said the trapper.

And that is what happened. Goodine and Doctor Nash set off at a brisk
trot in the sled, taking Captain Wigmore along with them as far as his
own gate. He gave them some exact information as to the place where he
had picked up the knife. He said that he was sorry that he could not go
along with them, but he was an old man and very tired. So they drove on
without him. Several teams had been hauling timber and cordwood that
way since the snow, so the road was in very good condition.

They reached the spot--or as near it as they could tell--where Wigmore
claimed to have found the knife, and spent half an hour in searching the
woods on both sides of the road. Needless to say, they found no further
trace of Mr. Banks. Then they went on all the way to Blue Hill Corner
and the railway station. The distance was fourteen miles--fourteen long
miles. At the village and the station they made inquiries, but no one
there had seen the big New Yorker. He had not left by the morning train.
They remained to dinner at Blue Hill Corner, searched the surrounding
country after dinner, then set out on the homeward road, making frequent
stops to hunt about in the woods. It was close upon sunset when they
reached Samson's Mill Settlement. Dick Goodine was depressed, and Doctor
Nash was in a bad temper.

"Darn this country, anyway!" exclaimed Nash. "It's full of a lot of
savages--and crooks. And what's to become of my practice if I have to
spend all my time hunting round for Banks? To hell with it!"

Early in the afternoon of the same day, Nell Harley received an
unexpected visit. It was from Maggie Leblanc. Jim was away, still
searching for the lost New Yorker, and Kate was busy in the sewing room
upstairs.

"I wanter tell'e somethin' very particular," said Maggie, in a faint
voice and with a flurried manner. "Let me tell ye all by yerself. It--it
be mighty particular."

"Is it about Mr. Banks? Do you know where he is?" asked Nell anxiously.

"No, it ain't about him," replied Maggie Leblanc. "I don't know nothin'
about him."

Nell led the way to the sitting room, and motioned her visitor to a
chair by the fire.

"Has--has anything happened to--Mr. Rayton?" she asked.

Maggie shook her head. "No! No! It is about me--an' Dick Goodine." She
brushed her eyes furtively with the back of her hand. "I liked Dick,"
she continued unsteadily; "but he didn't seem to care. Then I--begun to
feel's if I hated him. I knew him an' Davy Marsh was bad friends, so I
begun to try to get Dick inter trouble with Davy--an' maybe with the
law. After Davy's canoe upsot in the rapids that day, I went an' found
the broken pole in the pool, an' fixed an end of it so's it looked like
it had been cut halfway through. Then I put it up on a rock so's it
would be found.

"I knowed folks would think Dick done it because he an' Davy wasn't good
friends, an' he was the last man Davy seen afore he started upstream
that day. Dick helped Davy to load the canoe. Then--then _I_ sot fire to
Davy's camp. But when Dick said as how he didn't fire the camp nor cut
the pole, most every one seemed to believe him. I was feelin' different
about Dick by that time--mighty sorry I tried to hurt him. But I was
afeared to tell anybody what I done. Davy Marsh is that mean an' small,
he'd have the law on me. Then Mr. Rayton, he got shot--an' then Mr.
Banks, he got lost; an' this mornin' Dick Goodine up an' tells yer
brother, an' Doc Nash, an' a whole bunch more, as how it was him shot
Mr. Rayton."

"Yes. Jim told me of it. He mistook Mr. Rayton for a deer," said Nell.

"But some folks don't believe as how he took him for a deer," said
Maggie. "It's the talk all over the settlement now--an' old Captain
Wigmore, he be makin' a terrible story of it all. He has started up
talk about what happened to Dave Marsh ag'in. He's makin' it look 'sif
Dick done everything--an' like 'sif he done something to Mr. Banks, too.
An' there be plenty of fools in this settlement to listen to him. So I'm
tellin' ye the truth about who sot fire to Davy Marsh's camp. Davy don't
know it himself. He says Dick done it--when Dick ain't lookin'. But I
done it--an' 'twas me doctored that piece of canoe pole that broke by
accident first of all--an' I'm willin' to swear to it on the book!"

"You need not swear it to me," said Nell Harley. "I believe what you
have told me--every word of it--though it is a terrible thing! And I
believe whatever Dick Goodine says. What can I do to help Dick?"

"I guess you like Dick pretty well," said Maggie Leblanc, with a swift,
sidewise glance of her black eyes. "An' Dick likes you. That's why I got
mad at him, an' Wigmore an' some other folks say that's why he shot at
Mr. Rayton."

"Surely not!" cried Nell, in distress. "How can he say such things? Oh!
I am growing to detest that old man--with his everlasting smile. As for
Dick--why, he scarcely knows me. And he is Reginald's friend. And he
knows--of course he knows--that--that Reginald and I--love each other."

Maggie Leblanc nodded her head vigorously and smiled.

"Don't you fret yerself," she said. "If he don't know it, then I'll tell
him."

Her eyes clouded again instantly. "I guess ye can help Dick by just
tellin' yer brother Jim what I told ye. Then he'll stand up fer
Dick--him and Mr. Rayton will--an' what old Cap'n Wigmore says won't
harm him much, I guess."

"I will tell him. He will be on Dick's side, of course," said Nell. And
then, "But why is Captain Wigmore trying to get Dick into trouble? What
has he against Dick?"

"Maybe he's just tryin' to keep folks from lookin' too close at his own
doin's," said Maggie.

Nell Harley nodded, but said neither yes nor no. The thought was in her
own mind. Captain Wigmore, the recent troubles and mysteries, and the
marked cards had been associated in her thoughts of late.

Jim Harley got home in time for supper. He told of a fruitless search;
and then Nell told of Maggie Leblanc's amazing confession. Jim sighed as
if with sudden relief. After a minute of reflective silence, he said:
"But, still, the accidents followed the cards--except in this last case.
How are we to explain that--and the cards themselves? First, it was Davy
Marsh, and then Rayton; but the card was never dealt to Mr. Banks!"

"Which shows that your foolish old curse is going all wrong," said his
wife.

"Reginald does not believe in the curse--and neither do I," said Nell.

"Whoever did the injuries, and whoever dealt the cards, the injuries
have followed the dealing of the cards," said Jim gloomily.

"Except in this last case," said his wife. "It looks to me as if Fate,
or whatever you call it, is getting itself mixed up."

After supper, Jim, and his wife, and sister, all went over to see
Reginald Rayton. A fresh force of men had taken up the hunt for Mr.
Banks, and parties had started for every village and settlement within a
radius of thirty miles. The Harleys found Reginald in the sitting room,
in company with Dick Goodine and Doctor Nash. Rumor of old Wigmore's
campaign against the trapper had already reached them, and they were
talking it over. Nash was bitter.

"The old devil tried to put it on me," he said, "and maybe he would
have succeeded if Dick hadn't confessed. Just wait till I see him! Dick
shot Rayton; but it was Wigmore himself who fired Marsh's camp--yes, and
who's at the bottom of many more of these tricks!"

Then Nell Harley told them what Maggie Leblanc had confessed to her. The
silence that followed the story was broken by Dick Goodine.

"She told you that!" he exclaimed, jumping to his feet. "She told it
herself? To save me? Where is she now?"

He was about to leave the room when the door opened and he was
confronted by Captain Wigmore.




CHAPTER XX

THE CHOSEN INSTRUMENT OF FATE


Mr. Banks and Timothy Fletcher stood in Captain Wigmore's hall,
breathing quietly and straining eyes and ears. All was silent. All
seemed safe. Banks opened the door. The little porch was empty. He
stepped across the threshold, followed closely by the staggering
Fletcher. They pushed open the door of the porch, and stumbled out of
that horrible house, into the frosty moonshine, onto the crisp snow. No
lurking danger confronted them. They were free.

"Thank God!" cried Harvey P. Banks, hysterically.

The air was bitterly cold, and the two fugitives were without overcoats.
They were so overjoyed to find themselves free men again, however, that
they felt no discomfort from the gnawing of the frozen air. The little
servant clung to the big sportsman; and so they moved down the narrow
path and through the gate onto the highway.

"He's played his last dirty trick on me--or any one else," mumbled
Fletcher. "I've stood 'im too long--too long! Now, he'll go back where
he come from--the grinnin' snake!"

He leaned heavily on Banks' arm and laughed shrilly.

"Which way?" asked Banks.

"Don't care," replied Fletcher.

"We'll head straight for Rayton's, then," said Banks. "It seems a month
since I've seen Reginald. Then we'll smoke a cigar. Then we'll hunt up
our friend--and put the boots to him."

The cold, clean air strengthened them, and they were soon stepping out
at quite a respectable pace. They even crawled over fences and took
short cuts across snow-drifted meadows and pastures. They did not meet
or see a human being, for by this time the searchers were all miles away
from the settlement. They rested for a minute against Rayton's front
gate, then went quickly up the long, twisting road toward the low house
and glowing windows.

"There's company," said Timothy. "Maybe they're havin' another game o'
poker." He grinned at Banks. "Oh, you're easy! A baby could fool the lot
o' you," he added.

"Right you are. That is the sitting-room window. The curtains are not
drawn tight. Let's look in and see who's there," said Banks.

Banks took the first look.

"Reginald and Nash," he whispered. "And the girl--yes, and Jim and Dick.
And who's that sitting with his back to the window?"

Old Fletcher edged himself into the place of vantage.

"It's _him_!" he whispered. "It's that snake!"

"Quiet!" cautioned the other. "Look! He's on his feet. He's wiping his
eyes. There's been trouble. They have hurt his feelings, the poor, dear
old saint!"

Old Timothy Fletcher trembled like a wet dog.

"I'll saint 'im!" he hissed. "Come on! Come on!"

They left the window, opened the back door noiselessly, crossed the
kitchen on tiptoes, and threw open the door of the sitting room.
Fletcher pushed past Banks, and darted up to within a foot of Captain
Wigmore.

"You lyin', murderin', stinkin' old lunatic!" he screamed. "You thought
you'd leave me to starve, did you? It's back to the mad-house for
you--damn you!"

Every one in the room was standing, staring breathlessly. For a moment
Wigmore gaped at his old servant, his mouth open, his eyes like stones.
Then, with a choking cry, he reeled aside. Mr. Banks gripped him by the
shoulder, and shook him furiously.

"You devil!" he roared. "You smirking hypocrite! You've come to the end
of your deviltries!"

Wigmore made a dash for the door. Timothy Fletcher sprang in front of
him, and was hurled to the floor. Then Mr. Banks jumped after Wigmore,
caught the back of his coat, and at the same moment tripped over the
prostrate Timothy and crashed to earth. The little room was now in
tumult and confusion. Nell Harley crouched in a corner. Rayton stood
guard in front of her, his sound arm extended. Jim Harley sat upon the
shoulders of the big New Yorker, crying: "No murder here! No murder
here! What d'ye mean by it?"

Timothy, lying flat, clung to Wigmore's right leg.

"Stop him!" he yelled. "Stop him! He's mad--a ravin' lunatic!"

Wigmore kicked his old servant in the face, and wrenched himself clear.
In another second he would have been out of the room and away--but just
then Dick Goodine and Doctor Nash closed with the terrible old man,
crushed him to the floor, and held him there. They had their hands full,
but they continued to hold him down.

There came a brief lull in the terrific tumult--but the excitement was
not yet over. Mr. Harvey P. Banks was indignant. A madman had tried to
starve him to death, and now a presumably sane man sat upon his back and
called him a murderer. All his natural blandness was burned
out--scorched to a flake of ash. The passions of fur-clad, pit-dwelling
ancestors flamed within him. He arose furiously, twisted around, and
flung Jim Harley aside. He gripped him by the breast with his left hand,
by the right wrist with his right. He was quick as a lizard and strong
as a lion. The lumberman was like a child in his hands.

"You fool!" he cried, glaring. "What d'you mean by it? So you are on
Wigmore's side, are you?--on the side of the man who tried to murder his
servant and me--yes, and who marked and dealt those cursed cards! You'd
sit on _my_ back, would you? For two pins I'd pick you up and heave you
against the wall. Tell me--were you in league with this old devil? Tell
me quick--or I'll finish you! Did you know Wigmore was marking those
cards?"

"The cards!" cried poor Jim. "No, no! On my soul, I didn't know it! So
help me God, I thought it was the family curse!"

"You fool!" exclaimed Banks, loosening his grip and turning away. His
rage had also fallen to ashes, leaving his big face drawn and gray, and
his great limbs trembling. His eyes were dim.

"That snake poisons the air," he muttered.

He stepped across to where Goodine and Nash held down the squirming
captain.

"Let him get up. He has a good many things to explain to us," he said
quietly.

Just then poor old Fletcher raised his head, showing a cut and bleeding
mouth. Banks lifted him in his arms, and laid him on the couch.

"Don't stand there like a wooden image!" he said to Jim Harley. "Your
inactivity has done quite enough harm already. This old man has been
gagged, bound, and starved for days. Get him some brandy."

As Nash and Goodine removed their knees and hands from Captain Wigmore,
that old sinner began to laugh immoderately. Still laughing, he got
nimbly to his feet, bowed to right and left, and sat down in an
armchair.

"Mad as a dog," mumbled Fletcher, with his bleeding lips. "He never was
rightly cured, anyhow!"

"Mad?" queried the captain. "If you mean insane, my good fellow, you are
very much mistaken. That's right, Jim. Give him a drink--but first wipe
the blood off his lips. Don't spoil the flavor of good whisky with bad
blood."

"If you are not insane," said Banks, "then you are utterly evil--a thing
to crush out like a poisonous snake. But to look you in the eyes is to
read the proof of your insanity."

Wigmore frowned. "Banks," he said, "you are feeble. You have the mind
and outlook upon life of a boy of ten--of a backward boy of ten. But
even so, I believe you have more intelligence than our friends here.
However that may be, you managed to blunder across the right trail at
last. That's why I took you in hand."

"You seem to forget that I have escaped you," said Banks.

Wigmore nodded. "I made the mistake of underestimating your bodily
strength," he admitted. "I don't understand even now, how you managed
to get out of that closet. You couldn't kick down the door--even with
those boots."

"Never mind about that!" exclaimed Jim Harley, white with excitement.
"Tell me about the cards! What do you know about the cards?"

The old man gazed at him for a second or two with a face of derisive
inquiry, and then burst again into furious laughter.

"Absolutely cracked," said Doctor Nash. "Absolutely, utterly, hopelessly
off his chump!"

Wigmore ceased his wild laughter so suddenly that every one was
startled.

"Jim," he said, with a bland leer, "you are so simple and unsuspecting
that I hate to tell you the truth. But I have to do it, Jim, just to
prove to Banks and the rest that I am not insane. Jim, my boy, _I am the
chosen instrument of Fate_."

A brief, puzzled silence followed, which was broken by the croaking
voice of old Timothy Fletcher.

"Forget it!" snarled Timothy. "D'you mind the time you was the Sultan of
Turkey?"

Wigmore smiled at his servant, then glanced around the room, and tapped
his forehead suggestively with a finger.

"Instrument of Fate? Sultan of Turkey?" queried Banks.

Jim Harley leaned forward, clutched the old man's shoulder, and shook it
violently.

"What do you know about those cards?" he cried. "Tell me that--quick!"

"You seem to be in a terrible hurry, all of a sudden," replied the
captain. "Oh, well, it does not matter; but if you really knew just who
I am--if you fully realized who I am--you'd treat me with more
consideration. I am the chosen husband of your sister. I am her
_destiny_."

"Who _are_ you?" asked Harley, scarcely above a whisper.

"I am the instrument of the Fate that haunts the steps of your mother's
daughter," replied Wigmore. "I am the chosen instrument. I deal the
cards--and the blow falls. I do not have to soil my hands--to strike the
blows. I mark the cards, and deal them--and Fate does the rest, through
such tools as come to her hand."

He leered at Dick Goodine.

"Then you admit that you marked and dealt the cards!" cried Harley.

"Certainly, my dear boy. It was my duty to do so--just as it was my duty
to quiet Banks when he came blundering into my affairs. I am the keeper
of the curse--the instrument of Fate--the--the----"

He pressed both hands to his forehead, and sighed.

"The star boarder at the Fairville Insane Asylum," snarled Timothy
Fletcher, "an' may the devil catch that fool doctor who said you was
cured!" he added.

Wigmore lifted his face.

"I am John Edward Jackson," he said pleasantly, as if introducing
himself to strangers, "Captain Jackson--the exile."

"Jackson!" cried Jim Harley. "Jackson? What do you mean? Not _the_
Jackson?"

The old man nodded. "That's right, Jim. That's why I marked the cards. I
came here on purpose to look after Nell, you know. It was my duty."

"He is mad," said Banks. "He is not responsible for what he says or
does. He must be taken back to Fairville."

"Yes, I am Captain Jackson," continued old Wigmore. "I had to go away
from my home, so I took to seafaring for a while. What was the trouble?
Sometimes I remember and sometimes I forget. I got hold of a mine and
made money. Then I made a voyage back to my own country, on very
important business."

"That's one of the stories he used to tell me when I was his keeper in
the lunatic asylum," said Timothy Fletcher. "Sometimes he was Jackson
an' sometimes he was the Grand Turk."

"_You_ keep your mouth shut till you are spoken to," screamed Wigmore,
in sudden fury.

Harley stooped and gazed anxiously at the old man.

"Did you murder my father?" he asked, his voice shaking.

For a second the other stared at him blankly.

"Certainly not!" he cried indignantly. "All I have to do is place the
card! I engaged an old sailor, or something of the kind, to dispatch
your father. I indicate. Fate destroys."

Then he leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.




CHAPTER XXI

THE DEATH OF THE CURSE


Jim Harley's face twisted and stiffened like a grotesque and hideous
mask; his honest eyes narrowed and reddened; for a little while he stood
there, motionless as a figure of wood; then his tongue flickered out and
moistened his dry lips, and the fingers of his big hands opened and
closed several times. The strong fingers closed so desperately that the
nails furrowed the skin of his palms and came away with a stain of red.

"Damn you!" he cried, in a voice so terrible and unnatural that it
startled his hearers like a gun-shot in the small room. "Damn you, you
accursed murderer! You tell me that you murdered my father--and you sit
there and laugh. You devil! I'll kill you where you sit--with my empty
hands."

He sprang forward; but Banks threw out an arm like iron and grappled
with him in the nick of time. Of the others Rayton alone moved to help
in the protection of the old man who sat laughing in the chair. Dr. Nash
looked on with interest, Dick Goodine folded his arms and Fletcher
snarled, "Kill the old devil. Crazy or sane, he stinks to Heaven an'
cumbers the earth."

Banks and Harley staggered like drunken men within a foot of the old
man's chair. Harley was blind with rage. Every drop of blood, every
muscle, leapt to be at the slayer of his father. Nell, who had fled from
the room a moment before, now returned and ran to her brother, crying
out to him to be reasonable. Rayton followed the stumbling and reeling
of the wrestlers, too weak to assist Banks but plucking constantly at a
coat or shoulder. This time Harley was no child in the big sportsman's
arms. He fought like a mad man, possessed and a-fire with the
determination to destroy his father's murderer.

"It is a devil!" he cried. "Let me at him, I say," and twice he tripped
Banks and had him down with one knee on the floor. But he could not get
clear of the big fellow, nor overthrow him. And still Captain Wigmore
sat in the chair and laughed as if he should die of unholy mirth.

The superior weight of Mr. Banks told at last. He crushed Jim Harley to
the carpet and held him there, staring down at him with a flushed,
moist face. Harley glared up at him, still squirming and wriggling.

"Lie still," said Banks, breathlessly. "Do you want to add another
murder to the list of tragedies?"

"That's what I want to do," gasped Jim. "But it wouldn't be murder to
clean the face of the earth of that devil. Let me up, you big slob."

"You'll thank me for this, some day," replied Mr. Banks, sitting firmly
and heavily upon Jim Harley's heaving chest. By this time, Nell Harley
had subsided into Reginald's anxious and ready arms.

Captain Wigmore stopped laughing suddenly and glanced from Banks and Jim
on the floor to the girl and her lover.

"It's as good as a play," he said. "Banks, all this unseemly and
ungentlemanly struggle is thrown away. My young friend Jim was powerless
to do me any injury. I am beloved of the gods. I am the chosen
instrument of fate--of the fate of the Harley family. Reginald, you
silly young ass, I see you hold that lady in your arms with no other
feeling than that of pity for yourself. The fates have ordained that I
am to be her husband. Timothy, you glowering old fool, bring me a drink
of whisky. Don't stand there, sir! Step lively when I speak to you, or
I'll send for the bosun to put you in irons."

"Forget it," snarled Timothy Fletcher. "You'll never set yer lips to
another taste of whisky in this world, you old reprobate. I see death in
yer eyes now--an' already the flare of hell fire. It's a drink of water
ye'll be hollerin' for pretty soon."

"Let me up," said Jim Harley. "I promise you I won't touch him."

So Mr. Banks and Jim arose stiffly from the floor.

Captain Wigmore, or Captain Jackson, or the Sultan of Turkey--call him
what you will--glared at Timothy in silence for several seconds, with
hate and despair in his eyes. His long, slender fingers plucked at his
ashen lips. Again, as suddenly as a change of thought, he burst into mad
laughter; this laughter grew and thinned to shrieking, then fell
presently to sobbing and muttering. He seemed to crumple and shrink; and
slowly he slid from the low chair to the floor. The company looked on
without moving or speaking, some in a state of helpless horror, the
doctor and old Timothy Fletcher with harsh curiosity. Nell Harley hid
her face against Reginald's shoulder.

The murderer squirmed on the floor, sobbing and muttering; and by the
time Doctor Nash had decided that he was really having a fit the old
devil had finished having it. He was dead! Nash turned him over and felt
for his heart. The heart was still.

"The ugliest death I ever saw," said Nash, glancing up at the horrified
company.

"And the ugliest life," said old Timothy Fletcher.

Reginald led the girl from the room. They stumbled along the hall and
sat side by side upon the bottom step of the stairs. Then the girl began
to weep and the shaken young man to comfort her.

Old Wigmore's secret had not escaped with his wild and twisted spirit.

"Hoist him onto the sofa," said the doctor. "We'll sit on him here and
now."

All agreed that the so called Captain Wigmore had died in a fit. Then
Dick Goodine left the house, saying that a little fresh air would make
him feel cleaner. Mr. Banks lit a cigar, remarking that he would
fumigate this chamber of horrors. Then Dr. Nash, as coroner, and Jim
Harley, who was a justice of the peace, agreed that they had the
authority to search the belongings of the deceased. Timothy Fletcher
said that he knew where the old devil kept all his private papers. So
Rayton took Nell home, and Nash, Banks, Harley and the old servant drove
over to the dead man's house, taking the shrunken and stiffened clay
along with them in the back of the pung. They entered the empty house
and Timothy lit a candle and led the way upstairs to the captain's
bedroom. He pointed to a large, iron-bound wooden chest which stood at
the foot of the bed.

"There's where he keeps his ungodly secrets," he said. "Mind the corp,
gentlemen, or it'll turn over in agony when we unlock the box. Hell! how
I do wish the old sinner was alive to see it. I shouldn't wonder but
we'll find some bones of dead men in that box."

"Where is the key?" asked Banks, shivering at Timothy's words and
puffing nervously at a freshly lit cigar.

Timothy chuckled at the big man's discomfort and borrowed a strong knife
from Jim Harley. He went to a mahogany secretary which stood at the head
of the bed, opened the top drawer and applied the blade of the knife to
the front of a secret compartment within the drawer. He turned in a
moment and tossed a bunch of keys to Mr. Banks. Nash took the keys from
the New Yorker's hands and knelt down before the chest. Jim Harley held
the candle. The chest had three locks and each of the three called for a
separate key. At last the heavy lid was freed and lifted. The top of the
trunk was full of clothing. They lifted out a tray and found more
clothing. They lifted out another tray and found, in the bottom of the
chest, books, nautical instruments, a chart or two, a small bag of
English gold, a brace of revolvers and a small iron dispatch-box. In the
dispatch-box they found many documentary proofs of the old man's claim
to the style and title of Captain John Edward Jackson. They found his
ship-master's certificate, an appointment to the command of a gun-boat
in the Brazilian navy, title deeds to several mining properties in
Brazil, a yellow clipping from a St. John newspaper recording the
marriage of Captain Thomas Harley, and another reporting and commenting
upon Harley's sudden and deplorable death at the hands of an unknown
assassin.

"This little snake was the murderer. There can be no doubt about it,"
said Jim Harley.

"He is answering for it now," said Mr. Banks, quietly.

"I am afraid we must turn all these things over to the Crown," said
Nash. "I don't know anything about the law; but I imagine it is the
business of the Crown to take care of these things and look for heirs."

Mr. Banks nodded.

"I think the lawyers will find it a very pretty thing," he remarked. "As
for Samson's Mill Settlement, it will become known to the world."

"But we'll burn these newspaper clippings," said Jim Harley, snatching
them up and crushing them in his hand. "The murderer is dead and the
curse is dead. We'll let the old story die, too."

"I wonder if the title-deeds are straight," murmured Nash. "Can the
Crown collect, do you think? I'll make out my bill for professional
services, anyway."

"Heaven only knows what the lawyers will make of it," said Banks.

Harley thrust the scraps of old newspaper into the flame of the candle,
and as the blaze crawled up and threw red wavers of light around the
room, Banks and Nash jumped as if they were on springs, and old Timothy
Fletcher let out a yell.

"I thought the old varment was a-fire already an' lookin' over my
shoulder," explained Timothy, a minute later. He lit several more
candles and led the way downstairs and into the dining-room. He got out
a decanter of whisky, glasses and water. All four helped themselves to
stiff doses. Nash took a sip, then raised his glass.

"The old bounder started all manner of mischief in this place, between
friends and neighbors," he said, "but now he's dead we'll have a little
peace. Here's to peace! I wish Reginald Rayton was here to shake hands
with me."

"A very proper wish," said Mr. Banks. "The old rascal made fools of
every mother's son of us."

"He was a wonder," said Timothy Fletcher. "This place will be dull as
ditch water now. He was a great pot cracked, a great bottle busted. I
hope he stays dead, that's all. What yarns he used to tell me, when I
was his nurse at Fairville--afore he begun to pretend he was cured. I
used to think they was all lies; but now I guess they was true--the most
of them, anyhow. Of course I never stood for the Sultan of Turkey story.
An' he'd talk about the sea, an' foreign ports all smelly with sugar an'
rum an' spice, until I was pretty near ripe to run away an' sign on
with some skipper. An' the adventures! To hear him, gentlemen, you'd
swear that in all his v'yages he'd never gone ashore without savin' the
life of a beautiful woman nor glanced up at a window in the narrow
street without havin' a rose or a letter chucked out to him. He was a
wonder. Oh, yes, I admired his brains, even after I begun to hate him.
He was a good master to me for awhile after we left the mad-house--until
he commenced rollin' me up in blankets every now an' agin' an' jumping
on top of me when I was sound asleep, yowlin' like a moon-struck dog. I
should have spoke about all them things to one of you gentlemen, I know;
but I figgered as how he might grow out of them tricks some day an'
maybe remember me in his will. I'll miss him; but I ain't sorry to see
the last of him, damn him! I got my wages all safe--an' he paid me
well."




CHAPTER XXII

IN THE WAY OF HAPPINESS


Captain Wigmore was buried in Samson's Mill Settlement, in a little
graveyard on a spruce-sheltered slope behind the English church. A very
young parson drove thirty miles to bury him; and as a Baptist minister
had driven twenty miles for the same purpose a joint service was held.

"The old joker is safe buried, anyhow; an' I'm glad to know it," was
Timothy Fletcher's comment at the side of the grave.

"I'll never dig him up, you may be sure," said Mr. Banks.

Mr. Banks returned to New York a few days after the funeral, but not
before he had learned the date set by Nell Harley for her wedding. He
promised to be on hand to give the groom away. Timothy Fletcher bought
three big dogs for companions and continued to occupy the late captain's
house as caretaker. The dogs always slept in the same room with him and
he burned night lights by the score.

The Crown took charge of the late captain's properties and discovered
half a dozen heirs in the persons of Brazilian ladies who had considered
themselves widows for years past. The Crown had its troubles. The
Brazilian government stepped in generously to share these troubles.
Lawyers set to work in several languages and divers systems of
bookkeeping. What they made of it I don't know; but the wives were all
discredited and proven null and void--and Dr. Nash's bill remains unpaid
to this day.

Nell Harley and Reginald Rayton were married in June. Mr. Banks attended
in a frock coat and silk hat that surpassed everything present in
novelty and glory except the head-gear and coat of the groom. It was a
wonderful wedding; and to top it, the young couple set out immediately
for England to visit Reginald's people.

"That's what I call style, from first to last," said Mr. Samson. "Them's
the kind of folk I like to associate with, so long's they don't set in
to a game of cards."

Dick Goodine married Maggie Leblanc in July.

Poker is never played now in Samson's Mill Settlement. Timothy Fletcher
still lives in the house that nobody seems to own and that somehow has
been overlooked by the Crown, the Brazilian Government and the lawyers
in both languages. He works now and again for the Raytons or the
Harleys. Reginald has bought more land and built a new house and several
cottages. His farm is the largest, the best and the best-worked in the
country. Mr. Banks visits the Raytons every October, for the shooting,
and every June for the fishing.

Davy Marsh is guiding over on the Tobique now. He never comes home to
the settlement. I have heard that he is the most expensive guide on that
river--but not the best, by a long shot.

Dr. Nash is still a bachelor. He dines twice a week with the Raytons, as
a regular thing, and oftener when Mr. Banks is there. He is not a bad
sort, when you really know him well, and he knows you; but of course he
will always be something of an ass.


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *




                WORKS OF Theodore Goodridge Roberts


    A Captain of Raleigh's

    A Cavalier of Virginia

    Captain Love

    Brothers of Peril

    Hemming, the Adventurer

    Rayton: A Backwoods Mystery

    Comrades of the Trails

    The Red Feathers

    Flying Plover


    L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    53 Beacon Street, Boston, Mass.